<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Balin and Balan</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="balin-and-balan" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Balin and Balan</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Pellam the King, who held and lost with Lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that first war, and had his realm restored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rendered tributary, failed of late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send his tribute; wherefore Arthur called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His treasurer, one of many years, and spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go thou with him and him and bring it to us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest we should set one truer on his throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s word is God in man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>His Baron said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We go but harken: there be two strange knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sit near Camelot at a fountain-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mile beneath the forest, challenging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overthrowing every knight who comes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou I undertake them as we pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And send them to thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Arthur laughed upon him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old friend, too old to be so young, depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delay not thou for aught, but let them sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they find a lustier than themselves.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So these departed. Early, one fair dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light-winged spirit of his youth returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Arthur’s heart; he armed himself and went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So coming to the fountain-side beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balin and Balan sitting statuelike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brethren, to right and left the spring, that down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From underneath a plume of lady-fern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang, and the sand danced at the bottom of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the right of Balin Balin’s horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fast beside an alder, on the left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Balan Balan’s near a poplartree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fair Sirs,” said Arthur, “wherefore sit ye here?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balin and Balan answered “For the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory; we be mightier men than all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Arthur’s court; that also have we proved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whatsoever knight against us came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or I or he have easily overthrown.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I too,” said Arthur, “am of Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather proven in his Paynim wars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than famous jousts; but see, or proven or not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether me likewise ye can overthrow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur lightly smote the brethren down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightly so returned, and no man knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Balin rose, and Balan, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carolling water set themselves again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake no word until the shadow turned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the fringe of coppice round them burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spangled pursuivant, and crying “Sirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, follow! ye be sent for by the King,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They followed; whom when Arthur seeing asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me your names; why sat ye by the well?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balin the stillness of a minute broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying “An unmelodious name to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balin, ‘the Savage’⁠—that addition thine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother and my better, this man here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balan. I smote upon the naked skull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thrall of thine in open hall, my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was gauntleted, half slew him; for I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had spoken evil of me; thy just wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent me a three-years’ exile from thine eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not lived my life delightsomely:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I that did that violence to thy thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had often wrought some fury on myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving for Balan: those three kingless years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have past⁠—were wormwood-bitter to me. King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Methought that if we sat beside the well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hurled to ground what knight soever spurred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against us, thou would’st take me gladlier back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make, as ten-times worthier to be thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than twenty Balins, Balan knight. I have said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so⁠—not all. A man of thine today</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abashed us both, and brake my boast. Thy will?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Arthur “Thou hast ever spoken truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy too fierce manhood would not let thee lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, my true knight. As children learn, be thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wiser for falling! walk with me, and move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To music with thine Order and the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy chair, a grief to all the brethren, stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vacant, but thou retake it, mine again!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereafter, when Sir Balin entered hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lost one Found was greeted as in Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy that blazed itself in woodland wealth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leaf, and gayest garlandage of flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the walls and down the board; they sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cup clashed cup; they drank and someone sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet-voiced, a song of welcome, whereupon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their common shout in chorus, mounting, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those banners of twelve battles overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir, as they stirred of old, when Arthur’s host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaimed him Victor, and the day was won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Balan added to their Order lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wealthier life than heretofore with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Balin, till their embassage returned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir King,” they brought report, “we hardly found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So bushed about it is with gloom, the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him to whom ye sent us, Pellam, once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Christless foe of thine as ever dashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horse against horse; but seeing that thy realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath prospered in the name of Christ, the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took, as in rival heat, to holy things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And finds himself descended from the Saint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arimathaean Joseph; him who first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the great faith to Britain over seas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He boasts his life as purer than thine own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eats scarce enow to keep his pulse abeat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath pushed aside his faithful wife, nor lets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dame or damsel enter at his gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he should be polluted. This gray King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed us a shrine wherein were wonders⁠—yea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich arks with priceless bones of martyrdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thorns of the crown and shivers of the cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal (for thus he told us) brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By holy Joseph thither, that same spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith the Roman pierced the side of Christ.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He much amazed us; after, when we sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tribute, answered ‘I have quite foregone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All matters of this world: Garlon, mine heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him demand it,’ which this Garlon gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With much ado, railing at thine and thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But when we left, in those deep woods we found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knight of thine spear-stricken from behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead, whom we buried; more than one of us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried out on Garlon, but a woodman there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reported of some demon in the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was once a man, who driven by evil tongues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all his fellows, lived alone, and came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn black magic, and to hate his kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a hate, that when he died, his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became a Fiend, which, as the man in life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wounded by blind tongues he saw not whence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes from behind. This woodman showed the cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which he sallies, and wherein he dwelt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We saw the hoof-print of a horse, no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Arthur, “Let who goes before me, see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He do not fall behind me: foully slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And villainously! who will hunt for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This demon of the woods?” Said Balan, “I!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So claimed the quest and rode away, but first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embracing Balin, “Good my brother, hear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not thy moods prevail, when I am gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who used to lay them! hold them outer fiends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who leap at thee to tear thee; shake them aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams ruling when wit sleeps! yea, but to dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any of these would wrong thee, wrongs thyself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness their flowery welcome. Bound are they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak no evil. Truly save for fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fears for thee, so rich a fellowship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would make me wholly blest: thou one of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be one indeed: consider them, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their bearing in their common bond of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more of hatred than in Heaven itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more of jealousy than in Paradise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Balan warned, and went; Balin remained:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who⁠—for but three brief moons had glanced away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From being knighted till he smote the thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And faded from the presence into years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of exile⁠—now would strictlier set himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn what Arthur meant by courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Manhood, and knighthood; wherefore hovered round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lancelot, but when he marked his high sweet smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In passing, and a transitory word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make knight or churl or child or damsel seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From being smiled at happier in themselves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighed, as a boy lame-born beneath a height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That glooms his valley, sighs to see the peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun-flushed, or touch at night the northern star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one from out his village lately climed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought report of azure lands and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far seen to left and right; and he himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath hardly scaled with help a hundred feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the base: so Balin marvelling oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How far beyond him Lancelot seemed to move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groaned, and at times would mutter, “These be gifts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born with the blood, not learnable, divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond my reach. Well had I foughten⁠—well⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those fierce wars, struck hard⁠—and had I crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my slain self the heaps of whom I slew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So⁠—better!⁠—But this worship of the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That honour too wherein she holds him⁠—this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was the sunshine that hath given the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A growth, a name that branches o’er the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strength against all odds, and what the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So prizes⁠—overprizes⁠—gentleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her likewise would I worship an I might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never can be close with her, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brought her hither. Shall I pray the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let me bear some token of his Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon to gaze, remembering her⁠—forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heats and violences? live afresh?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, if the Queen disdained to grant it! nay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being so stately-gentle, would she make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My darkness blackness? and with how sweet grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She greeted my return! Bold will I be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some goodly cognizance of Guinevere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lieu of this rough beast upon my shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Langued gules, and toothed with grinning savagery.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Arthur, when Sir Balin sought him, said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What wilt thou bear?” Balin was bold, and asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear her own crown-royal upon shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat she smiled and turned her to the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who answered “Thou shalt put the crown to use.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crown is but the shadow of the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this a shadow’s shadow, let him have it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So this will help him of his violences!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No shadow,” said Sir Balin, “O my Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But light to me! no shadow, O my King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But golden earnest of a gentler life!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Balin bare the crown, and all the knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approved him, and the Queen, and all the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made music, and he felt his being move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In music with his Order, and the King.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The nightingale, full-toned in middle May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ever and anon a note so thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems another voice in other groves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, after some quick burst of sudden wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The music in him seemed to change, and grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint and far-off.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And once he saw the thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His passion half had gauntleted to death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That causer of his banishment and shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smile at him, as he deemed, presumptuously:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arm half rose to strike again, but fell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The memory of that cognizance on shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighted it down, but in himself he moaned:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Too high this mount of Camelot for me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These high-set courtesies are not for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I not rather prove the worse for these?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierier and stormier from restraining, break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into some madness even before the Queen?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, as a hearth lit in a mountain home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glancing on the window, when the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of twilight deepens round it, seems a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rages in the woodland far below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when his moods were darkened, court and King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the kindly warmth of Arthur’s hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadowed an angry distance: yet he strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn the graces of their Table, fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard with himself, and seemed at length in peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then chanced, one morning, that Sir Balin sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-bowered in that garden nigh the hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A walk of roses ran from door to door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A walk of lilies crost it to the bower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down that range of roses the great Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came with slow steps, the morning on her face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all in shadow from the counter door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot as to meet her, then at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he saw not, glanced aside, and paced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long white walk of lilies toward the bower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed the Queen; Sir Balin heard her “Prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou so little loyal to thy Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As pass without good morrow to thy Queen?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom Sir Lancelot with his eyes on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fain would I still be loyal to the Queen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea so,” she said, “but so to pass me by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loyal scarce is loyal to thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom all men rate the king of courtesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let be: ye stand, fair lord, as in a dream.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Lancelot with his hand among the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea⁠—for a dream. Last night methought I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That maiden Saint who stands with lily in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In yonder shrine. All round her prest the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the light upon her silver face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed from the spiritual lily that she held.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! these her emblems drew mine eyes⁠—away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For see, how perfect-pure! As light a flush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As hardly tints the blossom of the quince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would mar their charm of stainless maidenhood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sweeter to me,” she said, “this garden rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-hued and many-folded! sweeter still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wild-wood hyacinth and the bloom of May.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince, we have ridden before among the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those fair days⁠—not all as cool as these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though season-earlier. Art thou sad? or sick?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our noble King will send thee his own leech⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick? or for any matter angered at me?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Lancelot lifted his large eyes; they dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-tranced on hers, and could not fall: her hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed at his gaze: so turning side by side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They past, and Balin started from his bower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Queen? subject? but I see not what I see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Damsel and lover? hear not what I hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father hath begotten me in his wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I suffer from the things before me, know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn nothing; am not worthy to be knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A churl, a clown!” and in him gloom on gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deepened: he sharply caught his lance and shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stayed to crave permission of the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, mad for strange adventure, dashed away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He took the selfsame track as Balan, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fountain where they sat together, sighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Was I not better there with him?” and rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skyless woods, but under open blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came on the hoarhead woodman at a bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearily hewing. “Churl, thine axe!” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended, and disjointed it at a blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the woodman uttered wonderingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lord, thou couldst lay the Devil of these woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If arm of flesh could lay him.” Balin cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Him, or the viler devil who plays his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay that devil would lay the Devil in me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay,” said the churl, “our devil is a truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the flash of him but yestereven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some do say that our Sir Garlon too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath learned black magic, and to ride unseen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look to the cave.” But Balin answered him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old fabler, these be fancies of the churl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look to thy woodcraft,” and so leaving him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with slack rein and careless of himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with dug spur and raving at himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with droopt brow down the long glades he rode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So marked not on his right a cavern-chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yawn over darkness, where, nor far within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole day died, but, dying, gleamed on rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roof-pendent, sharp; and others from the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tusklike, arising, made that mouth of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereout the Demon issued up from Hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He marked not this, but blind and deaf to all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that chained rage, which ever yelpt within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past eastward from the falling sun. At once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt the hollow-beaten mosses thud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tremble, and then the shadow of a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot from behind him, ran along the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sideways he started from the path, and saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pointed lance as if to pierce, a shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light of armour by him flash, and pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vanish in the woods; and followed this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all so blind in rage that unawares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He burst his lance against a forest bough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishorsed himself, and rose again, and fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far, till the castle of a King, the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pellam, lichen-bearded, grayly draped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With streaming grass, appeared, low-built but strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruinous donjon as a knoll of moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battlement overtopt with ivytods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A home of bats, in every tower an owl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake the men of Pellam crying “Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wear ye this crown-royal upon shield?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Balin “For the fairest and the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ladies living gave me this to bear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stalled his horse, and strode across the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found the greetings both of knight and King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint in the low dark hall of banquet: leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid their green faces flat against the panes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprays grated, and the cankered boughs without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whined in the wood; for all was hushed within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till when at feast Sir Garlon likewise asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why wear ye that crown-royal?” Balin said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Queen we worship, Lancelot, I, and all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fairest, best and purest, granted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear it!” Such a sound (for Arthur’s knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were hated strangers in the hall) as makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white swan-mother, sitting, when she hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strange knee rustle through her secret reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made Garlon, hissing; then he sourly smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fairest I grant her: I have seen; but best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Best, purest? thou from Arthur’s hall, and yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So simple! hast thou eyes, or if, are these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far besotted that they fail to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fair wife-worship cloaks a secret shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truly, ye men of Arthur be but babes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A goblet on the board by Balin, bossed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With holy Joseph’s legend, on his right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, all of massiest bronze: one side had sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ship and sail and angels blowing on it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one was rough with wattling, and the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that low church he built at Glastonbury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Balin graspt, but while in act to hurl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through memory of that token on the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relaxed his hold: “I will be gentle,” he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And passing gentle,” caught his hand away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fiercely to Sir Garlon “Eyes have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saw today the shadow of a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot from behind me, run along the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes too that long have watched how Lancelot draws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From homage to the best and purest, might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Name, manhood, and a grace, but scantly thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, sitting in thine own hall, canst endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mouth so huge a foulness⁠—to thy guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, me of Arthur’s Table. Felon talk!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let be! no more!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But not the less by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scorn of Garlon, poisoning all his rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stung him in dreams. At length, and dim through leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blinkt the white morn, sprays grated, and old boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whined in the wood. He rose, descended, met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scorner in the castle court, and fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hate and loathing, would have past him by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when Sir Garlon uttered mocking-wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What, wear ye still that same crown-scandalous?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His countenance blackened, and his forehead veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bloated, and branched; and tearing out of sheath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brand, Sir Balin with a fiery “Ha!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thou be shadow, here I make thee ghost,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard upon helm smote him, and the blade flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Splintering in six, and clinkt upon the stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Garlon, reeling slowly backward, fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Balin by the banneret of his helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged him, and struck, but from the castle a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounded across the court, and⁠—men-at-arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A score with pointed lances, making at him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dashed the pummel at the foremost face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a low door dipt, and made his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wings through a glimmering gallery, till he marked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portal of King Pellam’s chapel wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inward to the wall; he stept behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence in a moment heard them pass like wolves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howling; but while he stared about the shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which he scarce could spy the Christ for Saints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld before a golden altar lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The longest lance his eyes had ever seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Point-painted red; and seizing thereupon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pushed through an open casement down, leaned on it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapt in a semicircle, and lit on earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hand at ear, and harkening from what side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blindfold rummage buried in the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might echo, ran the counter path, and found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His charger, mounted on him and away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An arrow whizzed to the right, one to the left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One overhead; and Pellam’s feeble cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stay, stay him! he defileth heavenly things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With earthly uses”⁠—made him quickly dive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the boughs, and race through many a mile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dense and open, till his goodly horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arising wearily at a fallen oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stumbled headlong, and cast him face to ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Half-wroth he had not ended, but all glad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knightlike, to find his charger yet unlamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Balin drew the shield from off his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at the priceless cognizance, and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have shamed thee so that now thou shamest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee will I bear no more,” high on a branch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung it, and turned aside into the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there in gloom cast himself all along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaning “My violences, my violences!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now the wholesome music of the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was dumbed by one from out the hall of Mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A damsel-errant, warbling, as she rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woodland alleys, Vivien, with her Squire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The fire of Heaven has killed the barren cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindled all the plain and all the wold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The new leaf ever pushes off the old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Old priest, who mumble worship in your quire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old monk and nun, ye scorn the world’s desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in your frosty cells ye feel the fire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The fire of Heaven is on the dusty ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wayside blossoms open to the blaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole wood-world is one full peal of praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The fire of Heaven is lord of all things good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And starve not thou this fire within thy blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But follow Vivien through the fiery flood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of Heaven is not the flame of Hell!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then turning to her Squire: “This fire of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This old sun-worship, boy, will rise again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beat the cross to earth, and break the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his Table.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Then they reached a glade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where under one long lane of cloudless air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before another wood, the royal crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkled, and swaying upon a restless elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew the vague glance of Vivien, and her Squire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazed were these; “Lo there,” she cried⁠—“a crown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne by some high lord-prince of Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there a horse! the rider? where is he?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, yonder lies one dead within the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not dead; he stirs!⁠—but sleeping. I will speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, royal knight, we break on thy sweet rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not, doubtless, all unearned by noble deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bounden art thou, if from Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help the weak. Behold, I fly from shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lustful King, who sought to win my love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through evil ways: the knight, with whom I rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath suffered misadventure, and my squire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath in him small defence; but thou, Sir Prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt surely guide me to the warrior King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arthur the blameless, pure as any maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get me shelter for my maidenhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I charge thee by that crown upon thy shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the great Queen’s name, arise and hence.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Balin rose, “Thither no more! nor Prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor knight am I, but one that hath defamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cognizance she gave me: here I dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Savage among the savage woods, here die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die: let the wolves’ black maws ensepulchre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their brother beast, whose anger was his lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O me, that such a name as Guinevere’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which our high Lancelot hath so lifted up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And been thereby uplifted, should through me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My violence, and my villainy, come to shame.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereat she suddenly laughed and shrill, anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighed all as suddenly. Said Balin to her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is this thy courtesy⁠—to mock me, ha?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence, for I will not with thee.” Again she sighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pardon, sweet lord! we maidens often laugh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sick at heart, when rather we should weep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew thee wronged. I brake upon thy rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now full loth am I to break thy dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou art man, and canst abide a truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though bitter. Hither, boy⁠—and mark me well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou remember at Caerleon once⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A year ago⁠—nay, then I love thee not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, thou rememberest well⁠—one summer dawn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the great tower⁠—Caerleon upon Usk⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, truly we were hidden: this fair lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flower of all their vestal knighthood, knelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In amorous homage⁠—knelt⁠—what else?⁠—O ay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knelt, and drew down from out his night-black hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mumbled that white hand whose ringed caress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had wandered from her own King’s golden head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lost itself in darkness, till she cried⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought the great tower would crash down on both⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Rise, my sweet King, and kiss me on the lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art my King.’ This lad, whose lightest word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mere white truth in simple nakedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw them embrace: he reddens, cannot speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So bashful, he! but all the maiden Saints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deathless mother-maidenhood of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry out upon her. Up then, ride with me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talk not of shame! thou canst not, an thou would’st,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do these more shame than these have done themselves.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She lied with ease; but horror-stricken he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering that dark bower at Camelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathed in a dismal whisper: “It is truth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sunnily she smiled: “And even in this lone wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet lord, ye do right well to whisper this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools prate, and perish traitors. Woods have tongues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As walls have ears: but thou shalt go with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will speak at first exceeding low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet is it the good King be not deceived.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See now, I set thee high on vantage ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence to watch the time, and eagle-like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stoop at thy will on Lancelot and the Queen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ceased; his evil spirit upon him leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ground his teeth together, sprang with a yell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore from the branch, and cast on earth, the shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove his mailed heel athwart the royal crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stampt all into defacement, hurled it from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the forest weeds, and cursed the tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The told-of, and the teller.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>That weird yell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unearthlier than all shriek of bird or beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled through the woods; and Balan lurking there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(His quest was unaccomplished) heard and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The scream of that Wood-devil I came to quell!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then nearing “Lo! he hath slain some brother-knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tramples on the goodly shield to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His loathing of our Order and the Queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My quest, meseems, is here. Or devil or man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guard thou thine head.” Sir Balin spake not word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But snatched a sudden buckler from the Squire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vaulted on his horse, and so they crashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In onset, and King Pellam’s holy spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reputed to be red with sinless blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redded at once with sinful, for the point</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the maiden shield of Balan pricked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hauberk to the flesh; and Balin’s horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wearied to the death, and, when they clashed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling back upon Balin, crushed the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inward, and either fell, and swooned away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to her Squire muttered the damsel: “Fools!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fellow hath wrought some foulness with his Queen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else never had he borne her crown, nor raved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus foamed over at a rival name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, Sir Chick, that scarce hast broken shell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art yet half-yolk, not even come to down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never sawest Caerleon upon Usk⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet hast often pleaded for my love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See what I see, be thou where I have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else Sir Chick⁠—dismount and loose their casques</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fain would know what manner of men they be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Squire had loosed them, “Goodly!⁠—look!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might have cropt the myriad flower of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And butt each other here, like brainless bulls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead for one heifer!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Then the gentle Squire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I hold them happy, so they died for love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, Vivien, though ye beat me like your dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too could die, as now I live, for thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Live on, Sir Boy,” she cried. “I better prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living dog than the dead lion: away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot brook to gaze upon the dead.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then leapt her palfrey o’er the fallen oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bounding forward “Leave them to the wolves.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when their foreheads felt the cooling air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balin first woke, and seeing that true face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Familiar up from cradle-time, so wan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crawled slowly with low moans to where he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his dying brother cast himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dying; and he lifted faint eyes; he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One near him; all at once they found the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staring wild-wide; then with a childlike wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drawing down the dim disastrous brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er him hung, he kissed it, moaned and spake;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Balin, Balin, I that fain had died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save thy life, have brought thee to thy death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why had ye not the shield I knew? and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampled ye thus on that which bare the Crown?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Balin told him brokenly, and in gasps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that had chanced, and Balan moaned again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Brother, I dwelt a day in Pellam’s hall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Garlon mocked me, but I heeded not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one said ‘Eat in peace! a liar is he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hates thee for the tribute!’ this good knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told me, that twice a wanton damsel came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought for Garlon at the castle-gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Pellam drove away with holy heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I well believe this damsel, and the one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood beside thee even now, the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘She dwells among the woods,’ he said, ‘and meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dallies with him in the Mouth of Hell.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul are their lives; foul are their lips; they lied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure as our own true Mother is our Queen.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother,” answered Balin, “woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My madness all thy life has been thy doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy curse, and darkened all thy day; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night has come. I scarce can see thee now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodnight! for we shall never bid again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodmorrow⁠—Dark my doom was here, and dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will be there. I see thee now no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not mine again should darken thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodnight, true brother.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Balan answered low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Goodnight, true brother here! goodmorrow there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We two were born together, and we die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together by one doom:” and while he spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed his death-drowsing eyes, and slept the sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Balin, either locked in either’s arm.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
