<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Gareth and Lynette</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="gareth-and-lynette" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Gareth and Lynette</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The last tall son of Lot and Bellicent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tallest, Gareth, in a showerful spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at the spate. A slender-shafted Pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost footing, fell, and so was whirled away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How he went down,” said Gareth, “as a false knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or evil king before my lance if lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were mine to use⁠—O senseless cataract,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing all down in thy precipitancy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet thou art but swollen with cold snows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine is living blood: thou dost His will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Maker’s, and not knowest, and I that know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have strength and wit, in my good mother’s hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linger with vacillating obedience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prisoned, and kept and coaxed and whistled to⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the good mother holds me still a child!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good mother is bad mother unto me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worse were better; yet no worse would I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven yield her for it, but in me put force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weary her ears with one continuous prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until she let me fly discaged to sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ever-highering eagle-circles up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great Sun of Glory, and thence swoop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down upon all things base, and dash them dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knight of Arthur, working out his will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cleanse the world. Why, Gawain, when he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Modred hither in the summertime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked me to tilt with him, the proven knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Modred for want of worthier was the judge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I so shook him in the saddle, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou hast half prevailed against me,’ said so⁠—he⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Modred biting his thin lips was mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he is alway sullen: what care I?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth went, and hovering round her chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked, “Mother, though ye count me still the child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet mother, do ye love the child?” She laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou art but a wild-goose to question it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then, mother, an ye love the child,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Being a goose and rather tame than wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the child’s story.” “Yea, my well-beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ’twere but of the goose and golden eggs.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth answered her with kindling eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, nay, good mother, but this egg of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was finer gold than any goose can lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this an Eagle, a royal Eagle, laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost beyond eye-reach, on such a palm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As glitters gilded in thy Book of Hours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was ever haunting round the palm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lusty youth, but poor, who often saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The splendour sparkling from aloft, and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘An I could climb and lay my hand upon it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then were I wealthier than a leash of kings.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever when he reached a hand to climb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One, that had loved him from his childhood, caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stayed him, ‘Climb not lest thou break thy neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I charge thee by my love,’ and so the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet mother, neither clomb, nor brake his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But brake his very heart in pining for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And past away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>To whom the mother said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“True love, sweet son, had risked himself and climbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And handed down the golden treasure to him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth answered her with kindling eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gold? said I gold?⁠—ay then, why he, or she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whosoe’er it was, or half the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ventured⁠—had the thing I spake of been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere gold⁠—but this was all of that true steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof they forged the brand Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightnings played about it in the storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the little fowl were flurried at it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there were cries and clashings in the nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sent him from his senses: let me go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Bellicent bemoaned herself and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou no pity upon my loneliness?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, where thy father Lot beside the hearth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies like a log, and all but smouldered out!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever since when traitor to the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought against him in the Barons’ war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur gave him back his territory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His age hath slowly droopt, and now lies there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yet-warm corpse, and yet unburiable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more; nor sees, nor hears, nor speaks, nor knows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both thy brethren are in Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit neither loved with that full love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel for thee, nor worthy such a love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay therefore thou; red berries charm the bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thee, mine innocent, the jousts, the wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never knewest finger-ache, nor pang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wrenched or broken limb⁠—an often chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those brain-stunning shocks, and tourney-falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frights to my heart; but stay: follow the deer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By these tall firs and our fast-falling burns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So make thy manhood mightier day by day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet is the chase: and I will seek thee out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some comfortable bride and fair, to grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy climbing life, and cherish my prone year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till falling into Lot’s forgetfulness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not thee, myself, nor anything.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay, my best son! ye are yet more boy than man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth, “An ye hold me yet for child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear yet once more the story of the child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, mother, there was once a King, like ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince his heir, when tall and marriageable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked for a bride; and thereupon the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set two before him. One was fair, strong, armed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to be won by force⁠—and many men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desired her; one good lack, no man desired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these were the conditions of the King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That save he won the first by force, he needs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must wed that other, whom no man desired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red-faced bride who knew herself so vile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That evermore she longed to hide herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor fronted man or woman, eye to eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea⁠—some she cleaved to, but they died of her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one⁠—they called her Fame; and one⁠—O Mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How can ye keep me tethered to you⁠—Shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man am I grown, a man’s work must I do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow the deer? follow the Christ, the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live pure, speak true, right wrong, follow the King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else, wherefore born?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>To whom the mother said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sweet son, for there be many who deem him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or will not deem him, wholly proven King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit in mine own heart I knew him King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was frequent with him in my youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard him Kingly speak, and doubted him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more than he, himself; but felt him mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of closest kin to me: yet⁠—wilt thou leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine easeful biding here, and risk thine all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life, limbs, for one that is not proven King?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay, till the cloud that settles round his birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath lifted but a little. Stay, sweet son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth answered quickly, “Not an hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that ye yield me⁠—I will walk through fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother, to gain it⁠—your full leave to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not proven, who swept the dust of ruined Rome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off the threshold of the realm, and crushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Idolaters, and made the people free?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who should be King save him who makes us free?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when the Queen, who long had sought in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break him from the intent to which he grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found her son’s will unwaveringly one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answered craftily, “Will ye walk through fire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who walks through fire will hardly heed the smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, go then, an ye must: only one proof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before thou ask the King to make thee knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine obedience and thy love to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mother⁠—I demand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And Gareth cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A hard one, or a hundred, so I go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay⁠—quick! the proof to prove me to the quick!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But slowly spake the mother looking at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Prince, thou shalt go disguised to Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hire thyself to serve for meats and drinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the scullions and the kitchen-knaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those that hand the dish across the bar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shalt thou tell thy name to anyone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt serve a twelvemonth and a day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For so the Queen believed that when her son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld his only way to glory lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low down through villain kitchen-vassalage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her own true Gareth was too princely-proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass thereby; so should he rest with her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed in her castle from the sound of arms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Silent awhile was Gareth, then replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The thrall in person may be free in soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I shall see the jousts. Thy son am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since thou art my mother, must obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I therefore yield me freely to thy will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hence will I, disguised, and hire myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve with scullions and with kitchen-knaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor tell my name to any⁠—no, not the King.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gareth awhile lingered. The mother’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of the wistful fear that he would go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turning toward him wheresoe’er he turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplext his outward purpose, till an hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When wakened by the wind which with full voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept bellowing through the darkness on to dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose, and out of slumber calling two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That still had tended on him from his birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the wakeful mother heard him, went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The three were clad like tillers of the soil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Southward they set their faces. The birds made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melody on branch, and melody in mid air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damp hill-slopes were quickened into green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the live green had kindled into flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it was past the time of Easterday.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, when their feet were planted on the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That broadened toward the base of Camelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off they saw the silver-misty morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling her smoke about the Royal mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rose between the forest and the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times the summit of the high city flashed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times the spires and turrets half-way down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricked through the mist; at times the great gate shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only, that opened on the field below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon, the whole fair city had disappeared.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then those who went with Gareth were amazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One crying, “Let us go no further, lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here is a city of Enchanters, built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fairy Kings.” The second echoed him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lord, we have heard from our wise man at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Northward, that this King is not the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only changeling out of Fairyland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who drave the heathen hence by sorcery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Merlin’s glamour.” Then the first again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lord, there is no such city anywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all a vision.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Gareth answered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughter, swearing he had glamour enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own blood, his princedom, youth and hopes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To plunge old Merlin in the Arabian sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pushed them all unwilling toward the gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was no gate like it under heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For barefoot on the keystone, which was lined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rippled like an ever-fleeting wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lady of the Lake stood: all her dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept from her sides as water flowing away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like the cross her great and goodly arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched under the cornice and upheld:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drops of water fell from either hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down from one a sword was hung, from one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A censer, either worn with wind and storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er her breast floated the sacred fish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the space to left of her, and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were Arthur’s wars in weird devices done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New things and old co-twisted, as if Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were nothing, so inveterately, that men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were giddy gazing there; and over all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on the top were those three Queens, the friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur, who should help him at his need.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then those with Gareth for so long a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at the figures, that at last it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dragon-boughts and elvish emblemings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to move, seethe, twine and curl: they called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Gareth, “Lord, the gateway is alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth likewise on them fixt his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long, that even to him they seemed to move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the city a blast of music pealed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back from the gate started the three, to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out thereunder came an ancient man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-bearded, saying, “Who be ye, my sons?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth, “We be tillers of the soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who leaving share in furrow come to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glories of our King: but these, my men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Your city moved so weirdly in the mist)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubt if the King be King at all, or come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Fairyland; and whether this be built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By magic, and by fairy Kings and Queens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether there be any city at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or all a vision: and this music now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath scared them both, but tell thou these the truth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then that old Seer made answer playing on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saying, “Son, I have seen the good ship sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keel upward, and mast downward, in the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And solid turrets topsy-turvy in air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here is truth; but an it please thee not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thou the truth as thou hast told it me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For truly as thou sayest, a Fairy King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Fairy Queens have built the city, son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They came from out a sacred mountain-cleft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the sunrise, each with harp in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And built it to the music of their harps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as thou sayest, it is enchanted, son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there is nothing in it as it seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving the King; though some there be that hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King a shadow, and the city real:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet take thou heed of him, for, so thou pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath this archway, then wilt thou become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thrall to his enchantments, for the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will bind thee by such vows, as is a shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man should not be bound by, yet the which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man can keep; but, so thou dread to swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass not beneath this gateway, but abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without, among the cattle of the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For an ye heard a music, like enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are building still, seeing the city is built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To music, therefore never built at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore built for ever.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Gareth spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angered, “Old master, reverence thine own beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That looks as white as utter truth, and seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wellnigh as long as thou art statured tall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why mockest thou the stranger that hath been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee fair-spoken?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But the Seer replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Know ye not then the Riddling of the Bards?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Confusion, and illusion, and relation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elusion, and occasion, and evasion’?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mock thee not but as thou mockest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that see thee, for thou art not who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seemest, but I know thee who thou art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou goest up to mock the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cannot brook the shadow of any lie.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Unmockingly the mocker ending here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to the right, and past along the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Gareth looking after said, “My men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our one white lie sits like a little ghost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on the threshold of our enterprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let love be blamed for it, not she, nor I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, we will make amends.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>With all good cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake and laughed, then entered with his twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camelot, a city of shadowy palaces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stately, rich in emblem and the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient kings who did their days in stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Merlin’s hand, the Mage at Arthur’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing all arts, had touched, and everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Arthur’s ordinance, tipt with lessening peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pinnacle, and had made it spire to heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever and anon a knight would pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outward, or inward to the hall: his arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clashed; and the sound was good to Gareth’s ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of bower and casement shyly glanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes of pure women, wholesome stars of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all about a healthful people stept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the presence of a gracious king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then into hall Gareth ascending heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice, the voice of Arthur, and beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far over heads in that long-vaulted hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The splendour of the presence of the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throned, and delivering doom⁠—and looked no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But felt his young heart hammering in his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought, “For this half-shadow of a lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The truthful King will doom me when I speak.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet pressing on, though all in fear to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gawain or Sir Modred, saw nor one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor other, but in all the listening eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those tall knights, that ranged about the throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear honour shining like the dewy star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dawn, and faith in their great King, with pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affection, and the light of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glory gained, and evermore to gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came a widow crying to the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King! Thy father, Uther, reft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my dead lord a field with violence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For howsoe’er at first he proffered gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, for the field was pleasant in our eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We yielded not; and then he reft us of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce, and left us neither gold nor field.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said Arthur, “Whether would ye? gold or field?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the woman weeping, “Nay, my lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field was pleasant in my husband’s eye.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Arthur, “Have thy pleasant field again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice the gold for Uther’s use thereof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to the years. No boon is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But justice, so thy say be proven true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accursed, who from the wrongs his father did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would shape himself a right!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And while she past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came yet another widow crying to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King! Thine enemy, King, am I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine own hand thou slewest my dear lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knight of Uther in the Barons’ war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Lot and many another rose and fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against thee, saying thou wert basely born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I held with these, and loathe to ask thee aught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lo! my husband’s brother had my son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thralled in his castle, and hath starved him dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And standeth seized of that inheritance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou that slewest the sire hast left the son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So though I scarce can ask it thee for hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant me some knight to do the battle for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kill the foul thief, and wreak me for my son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then strode a good knight forward, crying to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King! I am her kinsman, I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me to right her wrong, and slay the man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then came Sir Kay, the seneschal, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King! even that thou grant her none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This railer, that hath mocked thee in full hall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None; or the wholesome boon of gyve and gag.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Arthur, “We sit King, to help the wronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all our realm. The woman loves her lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace to thee, woman, with thy loves and hates!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kings of old had doomed thee to the flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aurelius Emrys would have scourged thee dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Uther slit thy tongue: but get thee hence⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest that rough humour of the kings of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return upon me! Thou that art her kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go likewise; lay him low and slay him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bring him here, that I may judge the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to the justice of the King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, be he guilty, by that deathless King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lived and died for men, the man shall die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then came in hall the messenger of Mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A name of evil savour in the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cornish king. In either hand he bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What dazzled all, and shone far-off as shines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A field of charlock in the sudden sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between two showers, a cloth of palest gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which down he laid before the throne, and knelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivering, that his lord, the vassal king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was even upon his way to Camelot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For having heard that Arthur of his grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made his goodly cousin, Tristram, knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for himself was of the greater state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being a king, he trusted his liege-lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would yield him this large honour all the more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So prayed him well to accept this cloth of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In token of true heart and fealty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Arthur cried to rend the cloth, to rend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pieces, and so cast it on the hearth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An oak-tree smouldered there. “The goodly knight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What! shall the shield of Mark stand among these?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, midway down the side of that long hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stately pile⁠—whereof along the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some blazoned, some but carven, and some blank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There ran a treble range of stony shields⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, and high-arching overbrowed the hearth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under every shield a knight was named:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this was Arthur’s custom in his hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When some good knight had done one noble deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms were carven only; but if twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms were blazoned also; but if none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield was blank and bare without a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving the name beneath; and Gareth saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield of Gawain blazoned rich and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Modred’s blank as death; and Arthur cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rend the cloth and cast it on the hearth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“More like are we to reave him of his crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than make him knight because men call him king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kings we found, ye know we stayed their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From war among themselves, but left them kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom were any bounteous, merciful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth-speaking, brave, good livers, them we enrolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us, and they sit within our hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as Mark hath tarnished the great name of king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Mark would sully the low state of churl:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, seeing he hath sent us cloth of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return, and meet, and hold him from our eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest we should lap him up in cloth of lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silenced for ever⁠—craven⁠—a man of plots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Craft, poisonous counsels, wayside ambushings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fault of thine: let Kay the seneschal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look to thy wants, and send thee satisfied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accursed, who strikes nor lets the hand be seen!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And many another suppliant crying came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With noise of ravage wrought by beast and man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evermore a knight would ride away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last, Gareth leaning both hands heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on the shoulders of the twain, his men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached between them toward the King, and asked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King (his voice was all ashamed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For see ye not how weak and hungerworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem⁠—leaning on these? grant me to serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For meat and drink among thy kitchen-knaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twelvemonth and a day, nor seek my name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter I will fight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>To him the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A goodly youth and worth a goodlier boon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so thou wilt no goodlier, then must Kay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master of the meats and drinks, be thine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He rose and past; then Kay, a man of mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wan-sallow as the plant that feels itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Root-bitten by white lichen,</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Lo ye now!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fellow hath broken from some Abbey, where,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God wot, he had not beef and brewis enow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However that might chance! but an he work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like any pigeon will I cram his crop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleeker shall he shine than any hog.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Lancelot standing near, “Sir Seneschal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleuth-hound thou knowest, and gray, and all the hounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A horse thou knowest, a man thou dost not know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad brows and fair, a fluent hair and fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High nose, a nostril large and fine, and hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large, fair and fine!⁠—Some young lad’s mystery⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, or from sheepcot or king’s hall, the boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is noble-natured. Treat him with all grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he should come to shame thy judging of him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Kay, “What murmurest thou of mystery?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think ye this fellow will poison the King’s dish?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, for he spake too fool-like: mystery!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tut, an the lad were noble, he had asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For horse and armour: fair and fine, forsooth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Fine-face, Sir Fair-hands? but see thou to it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thine own fineness, Lancelot, some fine day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undo thee not⁠—and leave my man to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Gareth all for glory underwent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sooty yoke of kitchen-vassalage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate with young lads his portion by the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And couched at night with grimy kitchen-knaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot ever spake him pleasantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Kay the seneschal, who loved him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would hustle and harry him, and labour him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond his comrade of the hearth, and set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the broach, draw water, or hew wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grosser tasks; and Gareth bowed himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all obedience to the King, and wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All kind of service with a noble ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That graced the lowliest act in doing it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the thralls had talk among themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one would praise the love that linkt the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot⁠—how the King had saved his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In battle twice, and Lancelot once the King’s⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Lancelot was the first in Tournament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Arthur mightiest on the battle-field⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gareth was glad. Or if some other told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How once the wandering forester at dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far over the blue tarns and hazy seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Caer-Eryri’s highest found the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A naked babe, of whom the Prophet spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He passes to the Isle Avilion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passes and is healed and cannot die”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gareth was glad. But if their talk were foul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he whistle rapid as any lark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or carol some old roundelay, and so loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first they mocked, but, after, reverenced him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Gareth telling some prodigious tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of knights, who sliced a red life-bubbling way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through twenty folds of twisted dragon, held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a gap-mouthed circle his good mates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying or sitting round him, idle hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charmed; till Sir Kay, the seneschal, would come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blustering upon them, like a sudden wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among dead leaves, and drive them all apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the thralls had sport among themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there were any trial of mastery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, by two yards in casting bar or stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was counted best; and if there chanced a joust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that Sir Kay nodded him leave to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would hurry thither, and when he saw the knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clash like the coming and retiring wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the spear spring, and good horse reel, the boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was half beyond himself for ecstasy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So for a month he wrought among the thralls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the weeks that followed, the good Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repentant of the word she made him swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saddening in her childless castle, sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the in-crescent and de-crescent moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arms for her son, and loosed him from his vow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This, Gareth hearing from a squire of Lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom he used to play at tourney once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When both were children, and in lonely haunts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would scratch a ragged oval on the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each at either dash from either end⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame never made girl redder than Gareth joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed; he sprang. “Out of the smoke, at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leap from Satan’s foot to Peter’s knee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These news be mine, none other’s⁠—nay, the King’s⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descend into the city:” whereon he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King alone, and found, and told him all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I have staggered thy strong Gawain in a tilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For pastime; yea, he said it: joust can I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make me thy knight⁠—in secret! let my name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be hidden, and give me the first quest, I spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like flame from ashes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Here the King’s calm eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on, and checked, and made him flush, and bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowly, to kiss his hand, who answered him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Son, the good mother let me know thee here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent her wish that I would yield thee thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thee my knight? my knights are sworn to vows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of utter hardihood, utter gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, loving, utter faithfulness in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uttermost obedience to the King.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth, lightly springing from his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My King, for hardihood I can promise thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For uttermost obedience make demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom ye gave me to, the Seneschal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mellow master of the meats and drinks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as for love, God wot, I love not yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But love I shall, God willing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Make thee my knight in secret? yea, but he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our noblest brother, and our truest man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one with me in all, he needs must know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let Lancelot know, my King, let Lancelot know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy noblest and thy truest!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And the King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But wherefore would ye men should wonder at you?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, rather for the sake of me, their King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the deed’s sake my knighthood do the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to be noised of.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Merrily Gareth asked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have I not earned my cake in baking of it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let be my name until I make my name!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My deeds will speak: it is but for a day.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with a kindly hand on Gareth’s arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiled the great King, and half-unwillingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loving his lusty youthhood yielded to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, after summoning Lancelot privily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have given him the first quest: he is not proven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look therefore when he calls for this in hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou get to horse and follow him far away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cover the lions on thy shield, and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far as thou mayest, he be nor ta’en nor slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then that same day there past into the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A damsel of high lineage, and a brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May-blossom, and a cheek of apple-blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hawk-eyes; and lightly was her slender nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tip-tilted like the petal of a flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She into hall past with her page and cried,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O King, for thou hast driven the foe without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See to the foe within! bridge, ford, beset</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By bandits, everyone that owns a tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord for half a league. Why sit ye there?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest would I not, Sir King, an I were king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till even the lonest hold were all as free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cursed bloodshed, as thine altar-cloth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that best blood it is a sin to spill.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Comfort thyself,” said Arthur. “I nor mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest: so my knighthood keep the vows they swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wastest moorland of our realm shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe, damsel, as the centre of this hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is thy name? thy need?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“My name?” she said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lynette my name; noble; my need, a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To combat for my sister, Lyonors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lady of high lineage, of great lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And comely, yea, and comelier than myself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lives in Castle Perilous: a river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs in three loops about her living-place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er it are three passings, and three knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defend the passings, brethren, and a fourth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of that four the mightiest, holds her stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her own castle, and so besieges her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break her will, and make her wed with him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but delays his purport till thou send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do the battle with him, thy chief man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot whom he trusts to overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wed, with glory: but she will not wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save whom she loveth, or a holy life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now therefore have I come for Lancelot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Arthur mindful of Sir Gareth asked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Damsel, ye know this Order lives to crush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wrongers of the Realm. But say, these four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who be they? What the fashion of the men?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They be of foolish fashion, O Sir King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fashion of that old knight-errantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ride abroad, and do but what they will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous or bestial from the moment, such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As have nor law nor king; and three of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud in their fantasy call themselves the Day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morning-Star, and Noon-Sun, and Evening-Star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being strong fools; and never a whit more wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth, who alway rideth armed in black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge man-beast of boundless savagery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He names himself the Night and oftener Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wears a helmet mounted with a skull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bears a skeleton figured on his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show that who may slay or scape the three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by himself, shall enter endless night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all these four be fools, but mighty men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore am I come for Lancelot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hereat Sir Gareth called from where he rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A head with kindling eyes above the throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A boon, Sir King⁠—this quest!” then⁠—for he marked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kay near him groaning like a wounded bull⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, King, thou knowest thy kitchen-knave am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty through thy meats and drinks am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can topple over a hundred such.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy promise, King,” and Arthur glancing at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought down a momentary brow. “Rough, sudden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pardonable, worthy to be knight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go therefore,” and all hearers were amazed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But on the damsel’s forehead shame, pride, wrath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew the May-white: she lifted either arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fie on thee, King! I asked for thy chief knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast given me but a kitchen-knave.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then ere a man in hall could stay her, turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled down the lane of access to the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took horse, descended the slope street, and past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weird white gate, and paused without, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field of tourney, murmuring “kitchen-knave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now two great entries opened from the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At one end one, that gave upon a range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of level pavement where the King would pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sunrise, gazing over plain and wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down from this a lordly stairway sloped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till lost in blowing trees and tops of towers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out by this main doorway past the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one was counter to the hearth, and rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High that the highest-crested helm could ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therethrough nor graze: and by this entry fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel in her wrath, and on to this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gareth strode, and saw without the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Arthur’s gift, the worth of half a town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A warhorse of the best, and near it stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two that out of north had followed him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This bare a maiden shield, a casque; that held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse, the spear; whereat Sir Gareth loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloak that dropt from collar-bone to heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloth of roughest web, and cast it down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from it like a fuel-smothered fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lookt half-dead, brake bright, and flashed as those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dull-coated things, that making slide apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dusk wing-cases, all beneath there burns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A jewelled harness, ere they pass and fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Gareth ere he parted flashed in arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then as he donned the helm, and took the shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mounted horse and graspt a spear, of grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storm-strengthened on a windy site, and tipt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With trenchant steel, around him slowly prest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people, while from out of kitchen came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thralls in throng, and seeing who had worked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lustier than any, and whom they could but love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted in arms, threw up their caps and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God bless the King, and all his fellowship!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on through lanes of shouting Gareth rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the slope street, and past without the gate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Gareth past with joy; but as the cur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pluckt from the cur he fights with, ere his cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be cooled by fighting, follows, being named,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His owner, but remembers all, and growls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering, so Sir Kay beside the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muttered in scorn of Gareth whom he used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To harry and hustle.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Bound upon a quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With horse and arms⁠—the King hath past his time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My scullion knave! Thralls to your work again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For an your fire be low ye kindle mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will there be dawn in West and eve in East?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begone!⁠—my knave!⁠—belike and like enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some old head-blow not heeded in his youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shook his wits they wander in his prime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crazed! How the villain lifted up his voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shamed to bawl himself a kitchen-knave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tut: he was tame and meek enow with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till peacocked up with Lancelot’s noticing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well⁠—I will after my loud knave, and learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he know me for his master yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the smoke he came, and so my lance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold, by God’s grace, he shall into the mire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence, if the King awaken from his craze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the smoke again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But Lancelot said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Kay, wherefore wilt thou go against the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that did never he whereon ye rail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever meekly served the King in thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abide: take counsel; for this lad is great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lusty, and knowing both of lance and sword.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tut, tell not me,” said Kay, “ye are overfine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mar stout knaves with foolish courtesies:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mounted, on through silent faces rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the slope city, and out beyond the gate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But by the field of tourney lingering yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muttered the damsel, “Wherefore did the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorn me? for, were Sir Lancelot lackt, at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might have yielded to me one of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who tilt for lady’s love and glory here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than⁠—O sweet heaven! O fie upon him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kitchen-knave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>To whom Sir Gareth drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(And there were none but few goodlier than he)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining in arms, “Damsel, the quest is mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead, and I follow.” She thereat, as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smells a foul-fleshed agaric in the holt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deems it carrion of some woodland thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shrew, or weasel, nipt her slender nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With petulant thumb and finger, shrilling, “Hence!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoid, thou smellest all of kitchen-grease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And look who comes behind,” for there was Kay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Knowest thou not me? thy master? I am Kay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We lack thee by the hearth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And Gareth to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Master no more! too well I know thee, ay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most ungentle knight in Arthur’s hall.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have at thee then,” said Kay: they shocked, and Kay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell shoulder-slipt, and Gareth cried again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead, and I follow,” and fast away she fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But after sod and shingle ceased to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind her, and the heart of her good horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was nigh to burst with violence of the beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce she stayed, and overtaken spoke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What doest thou, scullion, in my fellowship?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deem’st thou that I accept thee aught the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or love thee better, that by some device</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full cowardly, or by mere unhappiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast overthrown and slain thy master⁠—thou!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dish-washer and broach-turner, loon!⁠—to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou smellest all of kitchen as before.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Damsel,” Sir Gareth answered gently, “say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whate’er ye will, but whatsoe’er ye say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leave not till I finish this fair quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or die therefore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Ay, wilt thou finish it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet lord, how like a noble knight he talks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The listening rogue hath caught the manner of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, knave, anon thou shalt be met with, knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then by such a one that thou for all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kitchen brewis that was ever supt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt not once dare to look him in the face.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I shall assay,” said Gareth with a smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That maddened her, and away she flashed again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the long avenues of a boundless wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth following was again beknaved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir Kitchen-knave, I have missed the only way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Arthur’s men are set along the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood is nigh as full of thieves as leaves:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If both be slain, I am rid of thee; but yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Scullion, canst thou use that spit of thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight, an thou canst: I have missed the only way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So till the dusk that followed evensong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode on the two, reviler and reviled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then after one long slope was mounted, saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowl-shaped, through tops of many thousand pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gloomy-gladed hollow slowly sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To westward⁠—in the deeps whereof a mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round as the red eye of an Eagle-owl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the half-dead sunset glared; and shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascended, and there brake a servingman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying from out of the black wood, and crying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They have bound my lord to cast him in the mere.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Gareth, “Bound am I to right the wronged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straitlier bound am I to bide with thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the damsel spake contemptuously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead, and I follow,” Gareth cried again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Follow, I lead!” so down among the pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plunged; and there, blackshadowed nigh the mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mid-thigh-deep in bulrushes and reed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw six tall men haling a seventh along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone about his neck to drown him in it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three with good blows he quieted, but three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled through the pines; and Gareth loosed the stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off his neck, then in the mere beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumbled it; oilily bubbled up the mere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last, Gareth loosed his bonds and on free feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set him, a stalwart Baron, Arthur’s friend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well that ye came, or else these caitiff rogues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had wreaked themselves on me; good cause is theirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hate me, for my wont hath ever been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch my thief, and then like vermin here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drown him, and with a stone about his neck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under this wan water many of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie rotting, but at night let go the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rise, and flickering in a grimly light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance on the mere. Good now, ye have saved a life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth somewhat as the cleanser of this wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fain would I reward thee worshipfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What guerdon will ye?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Gareth sharply spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“None! for the deed’s sake have I done the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In uttermost obedience to the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wilt thou yield this damsel harbourage?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat the Baron saying, “I well believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You be of Arthur’s Table,” a light laugh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke from Lynette, “Ay, truly of a truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a sort, being Arthur’s kitchen-knave!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But deem not I accept thee aught the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scullion, for running sharply with thy spit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on a rout of craven foresters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thresher with his flail had scattered them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay⁠—for thou smellest of the kitchen still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But an this lord will yield us harbourage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So she spake. A league beyond the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a full-fair manor and a rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His towers where that day a feast had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held in high hall, and many a viand left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a costly cate, received the three.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there they placed a peacock in his pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the damsel, and the Baron set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gareth beside her, but at once she rose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Meseems, that here is much discourtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Setting this knave, Lord Baron, at my side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear me⁠—this morn I stood in Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayed the King would grant me Lancelot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight the brotherhood of Day and Night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last a monster unsubduable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any save of him for whom I called⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly bawls this frontless kitchen-knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The quest is mine; thy kitchen-knave am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty through thy meats and drinks am I.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Arthur all at once gone mad replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Go therefore,’ and so gives the quest to him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him⁠—here⁠—a villain fitter to stick swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than ride abroad redressing women’s wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sit beside a noble gentlewoman.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then half-ashamed and part-amazed, the lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now looked at one and now at other, left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel by the peacock in his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, seating Gareth at another board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat down beside him, ate and then began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friend, whether thou be kitchen-knave, or not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether it be the maiden’s fantasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether she be mad, or else the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or both or neither, or thyself be mad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ask not: but thou strikest a strong stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For strong thou art and goodly therewithal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saver of my life; and therefore now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here be mighty men to joust with, weigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether thou wilt not with thy damsel back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crave again Sir Lancelot of the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy pardon; I but speak for thine avail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saver of my life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And Gareth said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Full pardon, but I follow up the quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despite of Day and Night and Death and Hell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when, next morn, the lord whose life he saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had, some brief space, conveyed them on their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left them with God-speed, Sir Gareth spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead, and I follow.” Haughtily she replied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I fly no more: I allow thee for an hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lion and stout have isled together, knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In time of flood. Nay, furthermore, methinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ruth is mine for thee. Back wilt thou, fool?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hard by here is one will overthrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay thee: then will I to court again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shame the King for only yielding me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My champion from the ashes of his hearth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom Sir Gareth answered courteously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Say thou thy say, and I will do my deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allow me for mine hour, and thou wilt find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fortunes all as fair as hers who lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the ashes and wedded the King’s son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to the shore of one of those long loops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherethrough the serpent river coiled, they came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rough-thicketed were the banks and steep; the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full, narrow; this a bridge of single arc</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took at a leap; and on the further side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose a silk pavilion, gay with gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In streaks and rays, and all Lent-lily in hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that the dome was purple, and above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crimson, a slender banneret fluttering.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therebefore the lawless warrior paced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unarmed, and calling, “Damsel, is this he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The champion thou hast brought from Arthur’s hall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom we let thee pass.” “Nay, nay,” she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir Morning-Star. The King in utter scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee and thy much folly hath sent thee here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kitchen-knave: and look thou to thyself:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See that he fall not on thee suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay thee unarmed: he is not knight but knave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then at his call, “O daughters of the Dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And servants of the Morning-Star, approach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arm me,” from out the silken curtain-folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare-footed and bare-headed three fair girls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gilt and rosy raiment came: their feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dewy grasses glistened; and the hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All over glanced with dewdrop or with gem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sparkles in the stone Avanturine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These armed him in blue arms, and gave a shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue also, and thereon the morning star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth silent gazed upon the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood a moment, ere his horse was brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glorying; and in the stream beneath him, shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immingled with Heaven’s azure waveringly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gay pavilion and the naked feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms, the rosy raiment, and the star.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she that watched him, “Wherefore stare ye so?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shakest in thy fear: there yet is time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee down the valley before he get to horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will cry shame? Thou art not knight but knave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said Gareth, “Damsel, whether knave or knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far liefer had I fight a score of times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than hear thee so missay me and revile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair words were best for him who fights for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But truly foul are better, for they send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strength of anger through mine arms, I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I shall overthrow him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And he that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The star, when mounted, cried from o’er the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A kitchen-knave, and sent in scorn of me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such fight not I, but answer scorn with scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this were shame to do him further wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than set him on his feet, and take his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And arms, and so return him to the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, therefore, leave thy lady lightly, knave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avoid: for it beseemeth not a knave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ride with such a lady.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Dog, thou liest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I spring from loftier lineage than thine own.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake; and all at fiery speed the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shocked on the central bridge, and either spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent but not brake, and either knight at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled as a stone from out of a catapult</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond his horse’s crupper and the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell, as if dead; but quickly rose and drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth lashed so fiercely with his brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drave his enemy backward down the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel crying, “Well-stricken, kitchen-knave!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Gareth’s shield was cloven; but one stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid him that clove it grovelling on the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then cried the fallen, “Take not my life: I yield.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth, “So this damsel ask it of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good⁠—I accord it easily as a grace.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She reddening, “Insolent scullion: I of thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bound to thee for any favour asked!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then he shall die.” And Gareth there unlaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His helmet as to slay him, but she shrieked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be not so hardy, scullion, as to slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One nobler than thyself.” “Damsel, thy charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is an abounding pleasure to me. Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy life is thine at her command. Arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly pass to Arthur’s hall, and say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kitchen-knave hath sent thee. See thou crave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pardon for thy breaking of his laws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself, when I return, will plead for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shield is mine⁠—farewell; and, damsel, thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead, and I follow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And fast away she fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then when he came upon her, spake, “Methought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knave, when I watched thee striking on the bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savour of thy kitchen came upon me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little faintlier: but the wind hath changed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I scent it twenty-fold.” And then she sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ‘O morning star’ (not that tall felon there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom thou by sorcery or unhappiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or some device, hast foully overthrown),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O morning star that smilest in the blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O star, my morning dream hath proven true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smile sweetly, thou! my love hath smiled on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But thou begone, take counsel, and away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hard by here is one that guards a ford⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second brother in their fool’s parable⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pay thee all thy wages, and to boot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care not for shame: thou art not knight but knave.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom Sir Gareth answered, laughingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Parables? Hear a parable of the knave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was kitchen-knave among the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce was the hearth, and one of my co-mates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Owned a rough dog, to whom he cast his coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Guard it,’ and there was none to meddle with it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a coat art thou, and thee the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave me to guard, and such a dog am I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To worry, and not to flee⁠—and⁠—knight or knave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knave that doth thee service as full knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is all as good, meseems, as any knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward thy sister’s freeing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Ay, Sir Knave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, knave, because thou strikest as a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being but knave, I hate thee all the more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fair damsel, you should worship me the more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, being but knave, I throw thine enemies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay, ay,” she said, “but thou shalt meet thy match.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when they touched the second river-loop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge on a huge red horse, and all in mail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burnished to blinding, shone the Noonday Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond a raging shallow. As if the flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blows a globe of after arrowlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten thousand-fold had grown, flashed the fierce shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sun; and Gareth’s eyes had flying blots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before them when he turned from watching him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He from beyond the roaring shallow roared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What doest thou, brother, in my marches here?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she athwart the shallow shrilled again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here is a kitchen-knave from Arthur’s hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath overthrown thy brother, and hath his arms.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ugh!” cried the Sun, and vizoring up a red</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cipher face of rounded foolishness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pushed horse across the foamings of the ford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Gareth met midstream: no room was there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lance or tourney-skill: four strokes they struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sword, and these were mighty; the new knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fear he might be shamed; but as the Sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved up a ponderous arm to strike the fifth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hoof of his horse slipt in the stream, the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended, and the Sun was washed away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth laid his lance athwart the ford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So drew him home; but he that fought no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As being all bone-battered on the rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yielded; and Gareth sent him to the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Myself when I return will plead for thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead, and I follow.” Quietly she led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hath not the good wind, damsel, changed again?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, not a point: nor art thou victor here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lies a ridge of slate across the ford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horse thereon stumbled⁠—ay, for I saw it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O Sun’ (not this strong fool whom thou, Sir Knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast overthrown through mere unhappiness),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O Sun, that wakenest all to bliss or pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O moon, that layest all to sleep again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine sweetly: twice my love hath smiled on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What knowest thou of lovesong or of love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, nay, God wot, so thou wert nobly born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast a pleasant presence. Yea, perchance⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O dewy flowers that open to the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O dewy flowers that close when day is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow sweetly: twice my love hath smiled on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What knowest thou of flowers, except, belike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To garnish meats with? hath not our good King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lent me thee, the flower of kitchendom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foolish love for flowers? what stick ye round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pasty? wherewithal deck the boar’s head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowers? nay, the boar hath rosemaries and bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O birds, that warble to the morning sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O birds that warble as the day goes by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing sweetly: twice my love hath smiled on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What knowest thou of birds, lark, mavis, merle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linnet? what dream ye when they utter forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May-music growing with the growing light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sweet sun-worship? these be for the snare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(So runs thy fancy) these be for the spit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larding and basting. See thou have not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larded thy last, except thou turn and fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stands the third fool of their allegory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For there beyond a bridge of treble bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a rose-red from the west, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naked it seemed, and glowing in the broad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-dimpled current underneath, the knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That named himself the Star of Evening, stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth, “Wherefore waits the madman there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naked in open dayshine?” “Nay,” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not naked, only wrapt in hardened skins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fit him like his own; and so ye cleave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armour off him, these will turn the blade.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the third brother shouted o’er the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O brother-star, why shine ye here so low?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy ward is higher up: but have ye slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel’s champion?” and the damsel cried,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No star of thine, but shot from Arthur’s heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all disaster unto thine and thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both thy younger brethren have gone down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before this youth; and so wilt thou, Sir Star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou not old?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Old, damsel, old and hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old, with the might and breath of twenty boys.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Gareth, “Old, and over-bold in brag!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that same strength which threw the Morning Star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can throw the Evening.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Then that other blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hard and deadly note upon the horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Approach and arm me!” With slow steps from out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old storm-beaten, russet, many-stained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pavilion, forth a grizzled damsel came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And armed him in old arms, and brought a helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With but a drying evergreen for crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave a shield whereon the Star of Even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-tarnished and half-bright, his emblem, shone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when it glittered o’er the saddle-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They madly hurled together on the bridge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth overthrew him, lighted, drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There met him drawn, and overthrew him again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But up like fire he started: and as oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Gareth brought him grovelling on his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many a time he vaulted up again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Gareth panted hard, and his great heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foredooming all his trouble was in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laboured within him, for he seemed as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all in later, sadder age begins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To war against ill uses of a life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these from all his life arise, and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou hast made us lords, and canst not put us down!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He half despairs; so Gareth seemed to strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly, the damsel clamouring all the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well done, knave-knight, well-stricken, O good knight-knave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O knave, as noble as any of all the knights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame me not, shame me not. I have prophesied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike, thou art worthy of the Table Round⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms are old, he trusts the hardened skin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike⁠—strike⁠—the wind will never change again.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth hearing ever stronglier smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hewed great pieces of his armour off him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lashed in vain against the hardened skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And could not wholly bring him under, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than loud Southwesterns, rolling ridge on ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The buoy that rides at sea, and dips and springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever; till at length Sir Gareth’s brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clashed his, and brake it utterly to the hilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have thee now;” but forth that other sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, all unknightlike, writhed his wiry arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him, till he felt, despite his mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strangled, but straining even his uttermost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast, and so hurled him headlong o’er the bridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the river, sink or swim, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lead, and I follow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But the damsel said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I lead no longer; ride thou at my side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art the kingliest of all kitchen-knaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O trefoil, sparkling on the rainy plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O rainbow with three colours after rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine sweetly: thrice my love hath smiled on me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir⁠—and, good faith, I fain had added⁠—Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that I heard thee call thyself a knave⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamed am I that I so rebuked, reviled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Missaid thee; noble I am; and thought the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorned me and mine; and now thy pardon, friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou hast ever answered courteously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wholly bold thou art, and meek withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As any of Arthur’s best, but, being knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast mazed my wit: I marvel what thou art.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Damsel,” he said, “you be not all to blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving that you mistrusted our good King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would handle scorn, or yield you, asking, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fit to cope your quest. You said your say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine answer was my deed. Good sooth! I hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scarce is knight, yea but half-man, nor meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight for gentle damsel, he, who lets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart be stirred with any foolish heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At any gentle damsel’s waywardness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamed? care not! thy foul sayings fought for me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeing now thy words are fair, methinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There rides no knight, not Lancelot, his great self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath force to quell me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Nigh upon that hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the lone hern forgets his melancholy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets down his other leg, and stretching, dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of goodly supper in the distant pool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned the noble damsel smiling at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And told him of a cavern hard at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where bread and baken meats and good red wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Southland, which the Lady Lyonors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sent her coming champion, waited him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anon they past a narrow comb wherein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where slabs of rock with figures, knights on horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sculptured, and deckt in slowly-waning hues.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir Knave, my knight, a hermit once was here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose holy hand hath fashioned on the rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war of Time against the soul of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yon four fools have sucked their allegory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these damp walls, and taken but the form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know ye not these?” and Gareth lookt and read⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In letters like to those the vexillary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath left crag-carven o’er the streaming Gelt⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<b>Phosphorus</b>,” then “<b>Meridies</b>”⁠—“<b>Hesperus</b>”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<b>Nox</b>”⁠—“<b>Mors</b>,” beneath five figures, armed men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slab after slab, their faces forward all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And running down the Soul, a Shape that fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With broken wings, torn raiment and loose hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For help and shelter to the hermit’s cave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Follow the faces, and we find it. Look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who comes behind?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>For one⁠—delayed at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through helping back the dislocated Kay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Camelot, then by what thereafter chanced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel’s headlong error through the wood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot, having swum the river-loops⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His blue shield-lions covered⁠—softly drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the twain, and when he saw the star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleam, on Sir Gareth’s turning to him, cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stay, felon knight, I avenge me for my friend.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gareth crying pricked against the cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they closed⁠—in a moment⁠—at one touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that skilled spear, the wonder of the world⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went sliding down so easily, and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when he found the grass within his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed; the laughter jarred upon Lynette:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harshly she asked him, “Shamed and overthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tumbled back into the kitchen-knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why laugh ye? that ye blew your boast in vain?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, noble damsel, but that I, the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of old King Lot and good Queen Bellicent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And victor of the bridges and the ford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knight of Arthur, here lie thrown by whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not, all through mere unhappiness⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Device and sorcery and unhappiness⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out, sword; we are thrown!” And Lancelot answered, “Prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Gareth⁠—through the mere unhappiness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who came to help thee, not to harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lancelot, and all as glad to find thee whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on the day when Arthur knighted him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth, “Thou⁠—Lancelot!⁠—thine the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That threw me? An some chance to mar the boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brethren of thee make⁠—which could not chance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sent thee down before a lesser spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamed had I been, and sad⁠—O Lancelot⁠—thou!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat the maiden, petulant, “Lancelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why came ye not, when called? and wherefore now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come ye, not called? I gloried in my knave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who being still rebuked, would answer still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous as any knight⁠—but now, if knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marvel dies, and leaves me fooled and tricked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only wondering wherefore played upon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doubtful whether I and mine be scorned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where should be truth if not in Arthur’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Arthur’s presence? Knight, knave, prince and fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hate thee and for ever.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And Lancelot said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blessed be thou, Sir Gareth! knight art thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the King’s best wish. O damsel, be you wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To call him shamed, who is but overthrown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown have I been, nor once, but many a time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victor from vanquished issues at the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overthrower from being overthrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sword we have not striven; and thy good horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou are weary; yet not less I felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy manhood through that wearied lance of thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well hast thou done; for all the stream is freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast wreaked his justice on his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when reviled, hast answered graciously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makest merry when overthrown. Prince, Knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, Knight and Prince, and of our Table Round!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then when turning to Lynette he told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tale of Gareth, petulantly she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ay well⁠—ay well⁠—for worse than being fooled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of others, is to fool one’s self. A cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot, is hard by, with meats and drinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forage for the horse, and flint for fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all about it flies a honeysuckle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek, till we find.” And when they sought and found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gareth drank and ate, and all his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past into sleep; on whom the maiden gazed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sound sleep be thine! sound cause to sleep hast thou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wake lusty! Seem I not as tender to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As any mother? Ay, but such a one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As all day long hath rated at her child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vext his day, but blesses him asleep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good lord, how sweetly smells the honeysuckle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hushed night, as if the world were one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of utter peace, and love, and gentleness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Lancelot, Lancelot”⁠—and she clapt her hands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Full merry am I to find my goodly knave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is knight and noble. See now, sworn have I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else yon black felon had not let me pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring thee back to do the battle with him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus an thou goest, he will fight thee first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who doubts thee victor? so will my knight-knave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miss the full flower of this accomplishment.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said Lancelot, “Peradventure he, you name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May know my shield. Let Gareth, an he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change his for mine, and take my charger, fresh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be spurred, loving the battle as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he that rides him.” “Lancelot-like,” she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Courteous in this, Lord Lancelot, as in all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gareth, wakening, fiercely clutched the shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ramp ye lance-splintering lions, on whom all spears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are rotten sticks! ye seem agape to roar!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, ramp and roar at leaving of your lord!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care not, good beasts, so well I care for you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O noble Lancelot, from my hold on these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams virtue⁠—fire⁠—through one that will not shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the shadow of Lancelot under shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence: let us go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Silent the silent field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They traversed. Arthur’s harp though summer-wan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In counter motion to the clouds, allured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance of Gareth dreaming on his liege.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A star shot: “Lo,” said Gareth, “the foe falls!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An owl whoopt: “Hark the victor pealing there!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly she that rode upon his left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clung to the shield that Lancelot lent him, crying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yield, yield him this again: ’tis he must fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I curse the tongue that all through yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reviled thee, and hath wrought on Lancelot now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lend thee horse and shield: wonders ye have done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miracles ye cannot: here is glory enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In having flung the three: I see thee maimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mangled: I swear thou canst not fling the fourth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And wherefore, damsel? tell me all ye know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You cannot scare me; nor rough face, or voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brute bulk of limb, or boundless savagery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appal me from the quest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Nay, Prince,” she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God wot, I never looked upon the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing he never rides abroad by day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But watched him have I like a phantom pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chilling the night: nor have I heard the voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always he made his mouthpiece of a page</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who came and went, and still reported him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As closing in himself the strength of ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when his anger tare him, massacring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man, woman, lad and girl⁠—yea, the soft babe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some hold that he hath swallowed infant flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monster! O Prince, I went for Lancelot first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quest is Lancelot’s: give him back the shield.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said Gareth laughing, “An he fight for this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belike he wins it as the better man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus⁠—and not else!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But Lancelot on him urged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the devisings of their chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When one might meet a mightier than himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How best to manage horse, lance, sword and shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so fill up the gap where force might fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With skill and fineness. Instant were his words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Gareth, “Here be rules. I know but one⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dash against mine enemy and win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet have I seen thee victor in the joust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seen thy way.” “Heaven help thee,” sighed Lynette.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then for a space, and under cloud that grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thunder-gloom palling all stars, they rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In converse till she made her palfrey halt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted an arm, and softly whispered, “There.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the three were silent seeing, pitched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the Castle Perilous on flat field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge pavilion like a mountain peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunder the glooming crimson on the marge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black, with black banner, and a long black horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside it hanging; which Sir Gareth graspt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, before the two could hinder him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent all his heart and breath through all the horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed the walls; a light twinkled; anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came lights and lights, and once again he blew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon were hollow tramplings up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And muffled voices heard, and shadows past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till high above him, circled with her maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lady Lyonors at a window stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful among lights, and waving to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White hands, and courtesy; but when the Prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times had blown⁠—after long hush⁠—at last⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The huge pavilion slowly yielded up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through those black foldings, that which housed therein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on a nightblack horse, in nightblack arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With white breast-bone, and barren ribs of Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowned with fleshless laughter⁠—some ten steps⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the half-light⁠—through the dim dawn⁠—advanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monster, and then paused, and spake no word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Gareth spake and all indignantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fool, for thou hast, men say, the strength of ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou not trust the limbs thy God hath given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But must, to make the terror of thee more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trick thyself out in ghastly imageries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that which Life hath done with, and the clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less dull than thou, will hide with mantling flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for pity?” But he spake no word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which set the horror higher: a maiden swooned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lady Lyonors wrung her hands and wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As doomed to be the bride of Night and Death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gareth’s head prickled beneath his helm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even Sir Lancelot through his warm blood felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ice strike, and all that marked him were aghast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At once Sir Lancelot’s charger fiercely neighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Death’s dark war-horse bounded forward with him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then those that did not blink the terror, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Death was cast to ground, and slowly rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with one stroke Sir Gareth split the skull.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half fell to right and half to left and lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with a stronger buffet he clove the helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As throughly as the skull; and out from this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Issued the bright face of a blooming boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh as a flower new-born, and crying, “Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay me not: my three brethren bad me do it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a horror all about the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stay the world from Lady Lyonors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never dreamed the passes would be past.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered Sir Gareth graciously to one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not many a moon his younger, “My fair child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What madness made thee challenge the chief knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur’s hall?” “Fair Sir, they bad me do it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hate the King, and Lancelot, the King’s friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hoped to slay him somewhere on the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never dreamed the passes could be past.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sprang the happier day from underground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lady Lyonors and her house, with dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And revel and song, made merry over Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As being after all their foolish fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And horrors only proven a blooming boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large mirth lived and Gareth won the quest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he that told the tale in older times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says that Sir Gareth wedded Lyonors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he, that told it later, says Lynette.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
