<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Guinevere</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="guinevere" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Guinevere</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Queen Guinevere had fled the court, and sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in the holy house at Almesbury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping, none with her save a little maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A novice: one low light betwixt them burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blurred by the creeping mist, for all abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a moon unseen albeit at full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white mist, like a face-cloth to the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clung to the dead earth, and the land was still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For hither had she fled, her cause of flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Modred; he that like a subtle beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay couchant with his eyes upon the throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to spring, waiting a chance: for this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chilled the popular praises of the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silent smiles of slow disparagement;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tampered with the Lords of the White Horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heathen, the brood by Hengist left; and sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make disruption in the Table Round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur, and to splinter it into feuds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serving his traitorous end; and all his aims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sharpened by strong hate for Lancelot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For thus it chanced one morn when all the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green-suited, but with plumes that mocked the may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been, their wont, a-maying and returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Modred still in green, all ear and eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbed to the high top of the garden-wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spy some secret scandal if he might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the Queen who sat betwixt her best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enid, and lissome Vivien, of her court</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wiliest and the worst; and more than this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw not, for Sir Lancelot passing by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spied where he couched, and as the gardener’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picks from the colewort a green caterpillar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from the high wall and the flowering grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grasses Lancelot plucked him by the heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast him as a worm upon the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he knew the Prince though marred with dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, reverencing king’s blood in a bad man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made such excuses as he might, and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full knightly without scorn; for in those days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No knight of Arthur’s noblest dealt in scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if a man were halt or hunched, in him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By those whom God had made full-limbed and tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorn was allowed as part of his defect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was answered softly by the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his Table. So Sir Lancelot holp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise the Prince, who rising twice or thrice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full sharply smote his knees, and smiled, and went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ever after, the small violence done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rankled in him and ruffled all his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sharp wind that ruffles all day long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little bitter pool about a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bare coast.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But when Sir Lancelot told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This matter to the Queen, at first she laughed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly, to think of Modred’s dusty fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shuddered, as the village wife who cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I shudder, someone steps across my grave;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then laughed again, but faintlier, for indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She half-foresaw that he, the subtle beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would track her guilt until he found, and hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would be for evermore a name of scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforward rarely could she front in hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or elsewhere, Modred’s narrow foxy face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heart-hiding smile, and gray persistent eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforward too, the Powers that tend the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help it from the death that cannot die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And save it even in extremes, began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vex and plague her. Many a time for hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the placid breathings of the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dead night, grim faces came and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her, or a vague spiritual fear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to some doubtful noise of creaking doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard by the watcher in a haunted house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That keeps the rust of murder on the walls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held her awake: or if she slept, she dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An awful dream; for then she seemed to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On some vast plain before a setting sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the sun there swiftly made at her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ghastly something, and its shadow flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it, till it touched her, and she turned⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lo! her own, that broadening from her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blackening, swallowed all the land, and in it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far cities burnt, and with a cry she woke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all this trouble did not pass but grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till even the clear face of the guileless King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trustful courtesies of household life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became her bane; and at the last she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Lancelot, get thee hence to thine own land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if thou tarry we shall meet again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if we meet again, some evil chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make the smouldering scandal break and blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the people, and our lord the King.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot ever promised, but remained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still they met and met. Again she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Lancelot, if thou love me get thee hence.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they were agreed upon a night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When the good King should not be there) to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And part forever. Vivien, lurking, heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She told Sir Modred. Passion-pale they met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greeted. Hands in hands, and eye to eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low on the border of her couch they sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stammering and staring. It was their last hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A madness of farewells. And Modred brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His creatures to the basement of the tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For testimony; and crying with full voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Traitor, come out, ye are trapt at last,” aroused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lancelot, who rushing outward lionlike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapt on him, and hurled him headlong, and he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stunned, and his creatures took and bare him off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all was still: then she, “The end is come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am shamed forever;” and he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mine be the shame; mine was the sin: but rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fly to my strong castle overseas:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will I hide thee, till my life shall end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There hold thee with my life against the world.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answered, “Lancelot, wilt thou hold me so?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, friend, for we have taken our farewells.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would God that thou couldst hide me from myself!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine is the shame, for I was wife, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwedded: yet rise now, and let us fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I will draw me into sanctuary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bide my doom.” So Lancelot got her horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set her thereon, and mounted on his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then they rode to the divided way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There kissed, and parted weeping: for he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love-loyal to the least wish of the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to his land; but she to Almesbury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled all night long by glimmering waste and weald,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard the Spirits of the waste and weald</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moan as she fled, or thought she heard them moan:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in herself she moaned “Too late, too late!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in the cold wind that foreruns the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blot in heaven, the Raven, flying high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Croaked, and she thought, “He spies a field of death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the Heathen of the Northern Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lured by the crimes and frailties of the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin to slay the folk, and spoil the land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when she came to Almesbury she spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to the nuns, and said, “Mine enemies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursue me, but, O peaceful Sisterhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive, and yield me sanctuary, nor ask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her name to whom ye yield it, till her time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell you:” and her beauty, grace and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought as a charm upon them, and they spared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask it.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>So the stately Queen abode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a week, unknown, among the nuns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with them mixed, nor told her name, nor sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapt in her grief, for housel or for shrift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But communed only with the little maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who pleased her with a babbling heedlessness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which often lured her from herself; but now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This night, a rumour wildly blown about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came, that Sir Modred had usurped the realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leagued him with the heathen, while the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was waging war on Lancelot: then she thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With what a hate the people and the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must hate me,” and bowed down upon her hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, until the little maid, who brooked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No silence, brake it, uttering, “Late! so late!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hour, I wonder, now?” and when she drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No answer, by and by began to hum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An air the nuns had taught her; “Late, so late!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which when she heard, the Queen looked up, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O maiden, if indeed ye list to sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing, and unbind my heart that I may weep.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat full willingly sang the little maid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late, late, so late! but we can enter still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No light had we: for that we do repent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learning this, the bridegroom will relent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No light: so late! and dark and chill the night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let us in, that we may find the light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late, too late: ye cannot enter now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Have we not heard the bridegroom is so sweet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let us in, though late, to kiss his feet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no, too late! ye cannot enter now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang the novice, while full passionately,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head upon her hands, remembering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her thought when first she came, wept the sad Queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said the little novice prattling to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O pray you, noble lady, weep no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let my words, the words of one so small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knowing nothing knows but to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if I do not there is penance given⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort your sorrows; for they do not flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From evil done; right sure am I of that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who see your tender grace and stateliness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But weigh your sorrows with our lord the King’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weighing find them less; for gone is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wage grim war against Sir Lancelot there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round that strong castle where he holds the Queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Modred whom he left in charge of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traitor⁠—Ah sweet lady, the King’s grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his own self, and his own Queen, and realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must needs be thrice as great as any of ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me, I thank the saints, I am not great.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if there ever come a grief to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cry my cry in silence, and have done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knows it, and my tears have brought me good:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even were the griefs of little ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As great as those of great ones, yet this grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is added to the griefs the great must bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That howsoever much they may desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silence, they cannot weep behind a cloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As even here they talk at Almesbury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the good King and his wicked Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And were I such a King with such a Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well might I wish to veil her wickedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But were I such a King, it could not be.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to her own sad heart muttered the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will the child kill me with her innocent talk?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But openly she answered, “Must not I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this false traitor have displaced his lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieve with the common grief of all the realm?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea,” said the maid, “this is all woman’s grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she is woman, whose disloyal life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath wrought confusion in the Table Round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which good King Arthur founded, years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With signs and miracles and wonders, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Camelot, ere the coming of the Queen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thought the Queen within herself again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will the child kill me with her foolish prate?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But openly she spake and said to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O little maid, shut in by nunnery walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What canst thou know of Kings and Tables Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what of signs and wonders, but the signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And simple miracles of thy nunnery?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the little novice garrulously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, but I know: the land was full of signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonders ere the coming of the Queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So said my father, and himself was knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great Table⁠—at the founding of it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rode thereto from Lyonnesse, and he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That as he rode, an hour or maybe twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the sunset, down the coast, he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange music, and he paused, and turning⁠—there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All down the lonely coast of Lyonnesse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with a beacon-star upon his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a wild sea-light about his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw them⁠—headland after headland flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on into the rich heart of the west:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the light the white mermaiden swam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong man-breasted things stood from the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent a deep sea-voice through all the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which the little elves of chasm and cleft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made answer, sounding like a distant horn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So said my father⁠—yea, and furthermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next morning, while he past the dim-lit woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself beheld three spirits mad with joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come dashing down on a tall wayside flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shook beneath them, as the thistle shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When three gray linnets wrangle for the seed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still at evenings on before his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flickering fairy-circle wheeled and broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying, and linked again, and wheeled and broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying, for all the land was full of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when at last he came to Camelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wreath of airy dancers hand-in-hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swung round the lighted lantern of the hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the hall itself was such a feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As never man had dreamed; for every knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had whatsoever meat he longed for served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By hands unseen; and even as he said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in the cellars merry bloated things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldered the spigot, straddling on the butts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the wine ran: so glad were spirits and men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the coming of the sinful Queen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the Queen and somewhat bitterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Were they so glad? ill prophets were they all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirits and men: could none of them foresee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even thy wise father with his signs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonders, what has fallen upon the realm?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the novice garrulously again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, one, a bard; of whom my father said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a noble war-song had he sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in the presence of an enemy’s fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the steep cliff and the coming wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a mystic lay of life and death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had chanted on the smoky mountain-tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When round him bent the spirits of the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their dewy hair blown back like flame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So said my father⁠—and that night the bard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang Arthur’s glorious wars, and sang the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wellnigh more than man, and railed at those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who called him the false son of Gorlois:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there was no man knew from whence he came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But after tempest, when the long wave broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All down the thundering shores of Bude and Bos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a day as still as heaven, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found a naked child upon the sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dark Tintagil by the Cornish sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was Arthur; and they fostered him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he by miracle was approven King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that his grave should be a mystery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all men, like his birth; and could he find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman in her womanhood as great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he was in his manhood, then, he sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twain together well might change the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even in the middle of his song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He faltered, and his hand fell from the harp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pale he turned, and reeled, and would have fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that they stayed him up; nor would he tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His vision; but what doubt that he foresaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This evil work of Lancelot and the Queen?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thought the Queen, “Lo! they have set her on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our simple-seeming Abbess and her nuns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To play upon me,” and bowed her head nor spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat the novice crying, with clasped hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame on her own garrulity garrulously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said the good nuns would check her gadding tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full often, “and, sweet lady, if I seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To vex an ear too sad to listen to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmannerly, with prattling and the tales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which my good father told me, check me too</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let me shame my father’s memory, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noblest manners, though himself would say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot had the noblest; and he died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Killed in a tilt, come next, five summers back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left me; but of others who remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the two first-famed for courtesy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pray you check me if I ask amiss⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But pray you, which had noblest, while you moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them, Lancelot or our lord the King?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the pale Queen looked up and answered her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir Lancelot, as became a noble knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was gracious to all ladies, and the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In open battle or the tilting-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbore his own advantage, and the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In open battle or the tilting-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbore his own advantage, and these two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the most nobly-mannered men of all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For manners are not idle, but the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of loyal nature, and of noble mind.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea,” said the maid, “be manners such fair fruit?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Lancelot’s needs must be a thousand-fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less noble, being, as all rumour runs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most disloyal friend in all the world.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To which a mournful answer made the Queen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O closed about by narrowing nunnery-walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What knowest thou of the world, and all its lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shadows, all the wealth and all the woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever Lancelot, that most noble knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were for one hour less noble than himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray for him that he scape the doom of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep for her that drew him to his doom.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea,” said the little novice, “I pray for both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I should all as soon believe that his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Lancelot’s, were as noble as the King’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I could think, sweet lady, yours would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as they are, were you the sinful Queen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So she, like many another babbler, hurt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom she would soothe, and harmed where she would heal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here a sudden flush of wrathful heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired all the pale face of the Queen, who cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Such as thou art be never maiden more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever! thou their tool, set on to plague</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And play upon, and harry me, petty spy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traitress.” When that storm of anger brake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Guinevere, aghast the maiden rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White as her veil, and stood before the Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As tremulously as foam upon the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands in a wind, ready to break and fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Queen had added “Get thee hence,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled frighted. Then that other left alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighed, and began to gather heart again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying in herself, “The simple, fearful child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meant nothing, but my own too-fearful guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Simpler than any child, betrays itself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But help me, heaven, for surely I repent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what is true repentance but in thought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even in inmost thought to think again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sins that made the past so pleasant to us:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have sworn never to see him more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see him more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And even in saying this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her memory from old habit of the mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went slipping back upon the golden days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which she saw him first, when Lancelot came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reputed the best knight and goodliest man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambassador, to lead her to his lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arthur, and led her forth, and far ahead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his and her retinue moving, they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapt in sweet talk or lively, all on love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sport and tilts and pleasure, (for the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was maytime, and as yet no sin was dreamed),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode under groves that looked a paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blossom, over sheets of hyacinth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seemed the heavens upbreaking through the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on from hill to hill, and every day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld at noon in some delicious dale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silk pavilions of King Arthur raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For brief repast or afternoon repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By couriers gone before; and on again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till yet once more ere set of sun they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dragon of the great Pendragonship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crowned the state pavilion of the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blaze by the rushing brook or silent well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when the Queen immersed in such a trance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moving through the past unconsciously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to that point where first she saw the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ride toward her from the city, sighed to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her journey done, glanced at him, thought him cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High, self-contained, and passionless, not like him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not like my Lancelot”⁠—while she brooded thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grew half-guilty in her thoughts again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There rode an armed warrior to the doors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A murmuring whisper through the nunnery ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on a sudden a cry, “The King.” She sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiff-stricken, listening; but when armed feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the long gallery from the outer doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang coming, prone from off her seat she fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grovelled with her face against the floor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There with her milk-white arms and shadowy hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She made her face a darkness from the King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the darkness heard his armed feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pause by her; then came silence, then a voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monotonous and hollow like a Ghost’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denouncing judgment, but though changed, the King’s:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Liest thou here so low, the child of one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I honoured, happy, dead before thy shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well is it that no child is born of thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children born of thee are sword and fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red ruin, and the breaking up of laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The craft of kindred and the Godless hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heathen swarming o’er the Northern Sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I, while yet Sir Lancelot, my right arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mightiest of my knights, abode with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have everywhere about this land of Christ</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In twelve great battles ruining overthrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knowest thou now from whence I come⁠—from him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From waging bitter war with him: and he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That did not shun to smite me in worse way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had yet that grace of courtesy in him left,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spared to lift his hand against the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made him knight: but many a knight was slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many more, and all his kith and kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clave to him, and abode in his own land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many more when Modred raised revolt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetful of their troth and fealty, clave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Modred, and a remnant stays with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of this remnant will I leave a part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True men who love me still, for whom I live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard thee in the wild hour coming on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest but a hair of this low head be harmed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear not: thou shalt be guarded till my death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit I know, if ancient prophecies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have erred not, that I march to meet my doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not made my life so sweet to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I the King should greatly care to live;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou hast spoilt the purpose of my life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear with me for the last time while I show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even for thy sake, the sin which thou hast sinned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when the Roman left us, and their law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relaxed its hold upon us, and the ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were filled with rapine, here and there a deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prowess done redressed a random wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I was first of all the kings who drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knighthood-errant of this realm and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The realms together under me, their Head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that fair Order of my Table Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glorious company, the flower of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve as model for the mighty world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be the fair beginning of a time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I made them lay their hands in mine and swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reverence the King, as if he were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their conscience, and their conscience as their King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break the heathen and uphold the Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ride abroad redressing human wrongs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To honour his own word as if his God’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead sweet lives in purest chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love one maiden only, cleave to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And worship her by years of noble deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they won her; for indeed I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of no more subtle master under heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than is the maiden passion for a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only to keep down the base in man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But teach high thought, and amiable words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And courtliness, and the desire of fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love of truth, and all that makes a man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all this throve before I wedded thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believing, ‘lo mine helpmate, one to feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My purpose and rejoicing in my joy.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came thy shameful sin with Lancelot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came the sin of Tristram and Isolt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then others, following these my mightiest knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drawing foul ensample from fair names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinned also, till the loathsome opposite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my heart had destined did obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all through thee! so that this life of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guard as God’s high gift from scathe and wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not greatly care to lose; but rather think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How sad it were for Arthur, should he live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sit once more within his lonely hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And miss the wonted number of my knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And miss to hear high talk of noble deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the golden days before thy sin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which of us, who might be left, could speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the pure heart, nor seem to glance at thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy bowers of Camelot or of Usk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shadow still would glide from room to room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I should evermore be vext with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hanging robe or vacant ornament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ghostly footfall echoing on the stair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For think not, though thou wouldst not love thy lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lord hast wholly lost his love for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not made of so slight elements.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I leave thee, woman, to thy shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hold that man the worst of public foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who either for his own or children’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save his blood from scandal, lets the wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom he knows false, abide and rule the house:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For being through his cowardice allowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her station, taken everywhere for pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She like a new disease, unknown to men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps, no precaution used, among the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes wicked lightnings of her eyes, and saps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fealty of our friends, and stirs the pulse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With devil’s leaps, and poisons half the young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worst of the worst were that man he that reigns!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better the King’s waste hearth and aching heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than thou reseated in thy place of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mockery of my people, and their bane.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He paused, and in the pause she crept an inch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer, and laid her hands about his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off a solitary trumpet blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then waiting by the doors the warhorse neighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a friend’s voice, and he spake again:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet think not that I come to urge thy crimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not come to curse thee, Guinevere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, whose vast pity almost makes me die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see thee, laying there thy golden head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My pride in happier summers, at my feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrath which forced my thoughts on that fierce law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doom of treason and the flaming death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When first I learnt thee hidden here) is past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pang⁠—which while I weighed thy heart with one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too wholly true to dream untruth in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made my tears burn⁠—is also past⁠—in part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all is past, the sin is sinned, and I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! I forgive thee, as Eternal God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgives: do thou for thine own soul the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how to take last leave of all I loved?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O golden hair, with which I used to play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not knowing! O imperial-moulded form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beauty such as never woman wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until it became a kingdom’s curse with thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot touch thy lips, they are not mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Lancelot’s: nay, they never were the King’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot take thy hand: that too is flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the flesh thou hast sinned; and mine own flesh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here looking down on thine polluted, cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I loathe thee:’ yet not less, O Guinevere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was ever virgin save for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My love through flesh hath wrought into my life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far, that my doom is, I love thee still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let no man dream but that I love thee still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance, and so thou purify thy soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so thou lean on our fair father Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter in that world where all are pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We two may meet before high God, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt spring to me, and claim me thine, and know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am thine husband⁠—not a smaller soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Lancelot, nor another. Leave me that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I charge thee, my last hope. Now must I hence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thick night I hear the trumpet blow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They summon me their King to lead mine hosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far down to that great battle in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I must strike against the man they call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sister’s son⁠—no kin of mine, who leagues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Lords of the White Horse, heathen, and knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traitors⁠—and strike him dead, and meet myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death, or I know not what mysterious doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou remaining here wilt learn the event;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hither shall I never come again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never lie by thy side; see thee no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And while she grovelled at his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She felt the King’s breath wander o’er her neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the darkness o’er her fallen head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceived the waving of his hands that blest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, listening till those armed steps were gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose the pale Queen, and in her anguish found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The casement: “peradventure,” so she thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I might see his face, and not be seen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, he sat on horseback at the door!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near him the sad nuns with each a light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, and he gave them charge about the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard and foster her for evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while he spake to these his helm was lowered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which for crest the golden dragon clung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Britain; so she did not see the face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which then was as an angel’s, but she saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wet with the mists and smitten by the lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dragon of the great Pendragonship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blaze, making all the night a steam of fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even then he turned; and more and more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moony vapour rolling round the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who seemed the phantom of a Giant in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enwound him fold by fold, and made him gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grayer, till himself became as mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her, moving ghostlike to his doom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she stretched out her arms and cried aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh Arthur!” there her voice brake suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then⁠—as a stream that spouting from a cliff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fails in mid air, but gathering at the base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-makes itself, and flashes down the vale⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went on in passionate utterance:</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Gone⁠—my lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone through my sin to slay and to be slain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he forgave me, and I could not speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell? I should have answered his farewell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mercy choked me. Gone, my lord the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My own true lord! how dare I call him mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of another cleaves to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes me one pollution: he, the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called me polluted: shall I kill myself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What help in that? I cannot kill my sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If soul be soul; nor can I kill my shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, nor by living can I live it down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The days will grow to weeks, the weeks to months</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The months will add themselves and make the years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The years will roll into the centuries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine will ever be a name of scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must not dwell on that defeat of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the world be; that is but of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What else? what hope? I think there was a hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except he mocked me when he spake of hope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hope he called it; but he never mocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mockery is the fume of little hearts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blessed be the King, who hath forgiven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wickedness to him, and left me hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in mine own heart I can live down sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be his mate hereafter in the heavens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before high God. Ah great and gentle lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wast, as is the conscience of a saint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his warring senses, to thy knights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom my false voluptuous pride, that took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full easily all impressions from below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not look up, or half-despised the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which I would not or I could not climb⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought I could not breathe in that fine air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pure severity of perfect light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I yearned for warmth and colour which I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lancelot⁠—now I see thee what thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art the highest and most human too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Lancelot, nor another. Is there none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will tell the King I love him though so late?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now⁠—ere he goes to the great Battle? none:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself must tell him in that purer life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now it were too daring. Ah my God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What might I not have made of thy fair world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I but loved thy highest creature here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was my duty to have loved the highest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It surely was my profit had I known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would have been my pleasure had I seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We needs must love the highest when we see it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Lancelot, nor another.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Here her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasped, made her vail her eyes: she looked and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The novice, weeping, suppliant, and said to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, little maid, for am I not forgiven?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then glancing up beheld the holy nuns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round her, weeping; and her heart was loosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her, and she wept with these and said,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye know me then, that wicked one, who broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vast design and purpose of the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O shut me round with narrowing nunnery-walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meek maidens, from the voices crying ‘shame.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must not scorn myself: he loves me still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let no one dream but that he loves me still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let me, if you do not shudder at me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shun to call me sister, dwell with you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wear black and white, and be a nun like you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast with your fasts, not feasting with your feasts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieve with your griefs, not grieving at your joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not rejoicing; mingle with your rites;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray and be prayed for; lie before your shrines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do each low office of your holy house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walk your dim cloister, and distribute dole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To poor sick people, richer in His eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ransomed us, and haler too than I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And treat their loathsome hurts and heal mine own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so wear out in almsdeed and in prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sombre close of that voluptuous day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which wrought the ruin of my lord the King.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She said: they took her to themselves; and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still hoping, fearing “is it yet too late?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt with them, till in time their Abbess died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she, for her good deeds and her pure life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the power of ministration in her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And likewise for the high rank she had borne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was chosen Abbess, there, an Abbess, lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For three brief years, and there, an Abbess, past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where beyond these voices there is peace.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
