<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pelleas and Ettarre</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="pelleas-and-ettarre" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Pelleas and Ettarre</h2>
			<p>
				<span>King Arthur made new knights to fill the gap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left by the Holy Quest; and as he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hall at old Caerleon, the high doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were softly sundered, and through these a youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelleas, and the sweet smell of the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past, and the sunshine came along with him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Make me thy knight, because I know, Sir King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that belongs to knighthood, and I love.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was his cry: for having heard the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had let proclaim a tournament⁠—the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden circlet and a knightly sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full fain had Pelleas for his lady won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden circlet, for himself the sword:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there were those who knew him near the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And promised for him: and Arthur made him knight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And this new knight, Sir Pelleas of the isles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lately come to his inheritance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lord of many a barren isle was he⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding at noon, a day or twain before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the forest called of Dean, to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caerleon and the King, had felt the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat like a strong knight on his helm, and reeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost to falling from his horse; but saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near him a mound of even-sloping side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon a hundred stately beeches grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here and there great hollies under them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for a mile all round was open space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fern and heath: and slowly Pelleas drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that dim day, then binding his good horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a tree, cast himself down; and as he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At random looking over the brown earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through that green-glooming twilight of the grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed to Pelleas that the fern without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burnt as a living fire of emeralds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that his eyes were dazzled looking at it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then o’er it crost the dimness of a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating, and once the shadow of a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying, and then a fawn; and his eyes closed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since he loved all maidens, but no maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In special, half-awake he whispered, “Where?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O where? I love thee, though I know thee not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fair thou art and pure as Guinevere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will make thee with my spear and sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As famous⁠—O my Queen, my Guinevere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I will be thine Arthur when we meet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Suddenly wakened with a sound of talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughter at the limit of the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glancing through the hoary boles, he saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange as to some old prophet might have seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vision hovering on a sea of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Damsels in divers colours like the cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sunset and sunrise, and all of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horses, and the horses richly trapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breast-high in that bright line of bracken stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the damsels talked confusedly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one was pointing this way, and one that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the way was lost.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And Pelleas rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loosed his horse, and led him to the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There she that seemed the chief among them said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In happy time behold our pilot-star!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth, we are damsels-errant, and we ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed as ye see, to tilt against the knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There at Caerleon, but have lost our way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To right? to left? straight forward? back again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which? tell us quickly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Pelleas gazing thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is Guinevere herself so beautiful?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For large her violet eyes looked, and her bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rosy dawn kindled in stainless heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round her limbs, mature in womanhood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slender was her hand and small her shape;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but for those large eyes, the haunts of scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She might have seemed a toy to trifle with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pass and care no more. But while he gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beauty of her flesh abashed the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though it were the beauty of her soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as the base man, judging of the good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Puts his own baseness in him by default</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of will and nature, so did Pelleas lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the young beauty of his own soul to hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believing her; and when she spake to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stammered, and could not make her a reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For out of the waste islands had he come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where saving his own sisters he had known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce any but the women of his isles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rough wives, that laughed and screamed against the gulls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makers of nets, and living from the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then with a slow smile turned the lady round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked upon her people; and as when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stone is flung into some sleeping tarn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circle widens till it lip the marge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread the slow smile through all her company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three knights were thereamong; and they too smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorning him; for the lady was Ettarre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was a great lady in her land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again she said, “O wild and of the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowest thou not the fashion of our speech?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or have the Heavens but given thee a fair face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lacking a tongue?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“O damsel,” answered he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I woke from dreams; and coming out of gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was dazzled by the sudden light, and crave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pardon: but will ye to Caerleon? I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go likewise: shall I lead you to the King?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lead then,” she said; and through the woods they went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while they rode, the meaning in his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tenderness of manner, and chaste awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His broken utterances and bashfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were all a burthen to her, and in her heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She muttered, “I have lighted on a fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raw, yet so stale!” But since her mind was bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hearing, after trumpet blown, her name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And title, “Queen of Beauty,” in the lists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried⁠—and beholding him so strong, she thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That peradventure he will fight for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And win the circlet: therefore flattered him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being so gracious, that he wellnigh deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wish by hers was echoed; and her knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all her damsels too were gracious to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she was a great lady.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And when they reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caerleon, ere they past to lodging, she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking his hand, “O the strong hand,” she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“See! look at mine! but wilt thou fight for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And win me this fine circlet, Pelleas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may love thee?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Then his helpless heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapt, and he cried, “Ay! wilt thou if I win?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ay, that will I,” she answered, and she laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straitly nipt the hand, and flung it from her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then glanced askew at those three knights of hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all her ladies laughed along with her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O happy world,” thought Pelleas, “all, meseems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are happy; I the happiest of them all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor slept that night for pleasure in his blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And green wood-ways, and eyes among the leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then being on the morrow knighted, sware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love one only. And as he came away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men who met him rounded on their heels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondered after him, because his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone like the countenance of a priest of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the flame about a sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled by fire from heaven: so glad was he.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Arthur made vast banquets, and strange knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the four winds came in: and each one sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though served with choice from air, land, stream, and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft in mid-banquet measuring with his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His neighbour’s make and might: and Pelleas looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble among the noble, for he dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lady loved him, and he knew himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved of the King: and him his new-made knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worshipt, whose lightest whisper moved him more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than all the ranged reasons of the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then blushed and brake the morning of the jousts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this was called “The Tournament of Youth:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Arthur, loving his young knight, withheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His older and his mightier from the lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Pelleas might obtain his lady’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to her promise, and remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord of the tourney. And Arthur had the jousts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in the flat field by the shore of Usk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holden: the gilded parapets were crowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With faces, and the great tower filled with eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the summit, and the trumpets blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There all day long Sir Pelleas kept the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With honour: so by that strong hand of his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword and golden circlet were achieved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rang the shout his lady loved: the heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pride and glory fired her face; her eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparkled; she caught the circlet from his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there before the people crowned herself:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So for the last time she was gracious to him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then at Caerleon for a space⁠—her look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright for all others, cloudier on her knight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingered Ettarre: and seeing Pelleas droop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Guinevere, “We marvel at thee much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O damsel, wearing this unsunny face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who won thee glory!” And she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Had ye not held your Lancelot in your bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Queen, he had not won.” Whereat the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one whose foot is bitten by an ant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glanced down upon her, turned and went her way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But after, when her damsels, and herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those three knights all set their faces home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Pelleas followed. She that saw him cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Damsels⁠—and yet I should be shamed to say it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot bide Sir Baby. Keep him back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among yourselves. Would rather that we had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some rough old knight who knew the worldly way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit grizzlier than a bear, to ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And jest with: take him to you, keep him off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pamper him with papmeat, if ye will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old milky fables of the wolf and sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as the wholesome mothers tell their boys.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, should ye try him with a merry one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find his mettle, good: and if he fly us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small matter! let him.” This her damsels heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mindful of her small and cruel hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, closing round him through the journey home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acted her hest, and always from her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrained him with all manner of device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that he could not come to speech with her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she gained her castle, upsprang the bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down rang the grate of iron through the groove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was left alone in open field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“These be the ways of ladies,” Pelleas thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To those who love them, trials of our faith.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, let her prove me to the uttermost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For loyal to the uttermost am I.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So made his moan; and darkness falling, sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A priory not far off, there lodged, but rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With morning every day, and, moist or dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-armed upon his charger all day long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat by the walls, and no one opened to him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And this persistence turned her scorn to wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then calling her three knights, she charged them, “Out!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive him from the walls.” And out they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pelleas overthrew them as they dashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him one by one; and these returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still he kept his watch beneath the wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereon her wrath became a hate; and once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A week beyond, while walking on the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her three knights, she pointed downward, “Look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He haunts me⁠—I cannot breathe⁠—besieges me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down! strike him! put my hate into your strokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive him from my walls.” And down they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pelleas overthrew them one by one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the tower above him cried Ettarre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bind him, and bring him in.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>He heard her voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let the strong hand, which had overthrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her minion-knights, by those he overthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be bounden straight, and so they brought him in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then when he came before Ettarre, the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her rich beauty made him at one glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More bondsman in his heart than in his bonds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet with good cheer he spake, “Behold me, Lady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prisoner, and the vassal of thy will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thou keep me in thy donjon here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content am I so that I see thy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But once a day: for I have sworn my vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast given thy promise, and I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all these pains are trials of my faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that thyself, when thou hast seen me strained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sifted to the utmost, wilt at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield me thy love and know me for thy knight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she began to rail so bitterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all her damsels, he was stricken mute;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when she mocked his vows and the great King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighted on words: “For pity of thine own self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace, Lady, peace: is he not thine and mine?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou fool,” she said, “I never heard his voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But longed to break away. Unbind him now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrust him out of doors; for save he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool to the midmost marrow of his bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will return no more.” And those, her three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed, and unbound, and thrust him from the gate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And after this, a week beyond, again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She called them, saying, “There he watches yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There like a dog before his master’s door!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kicked, he returns: do ye not hate him, ye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye know yourselves: how can ye bide at peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affronted with his fulsome innocence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ye but creatures of the board and bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No men to strike? Fall on him all at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if ye slay him I reck not: if ye fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give ye the slave mine order to be bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bind him as heretofore, and bring him in:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be ye shall slay him in his bonds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; and at her will they couched their spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three against one: and Gawain passing by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound upon solitary adventure, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low down beneath the shadow of those towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A villainy, three to one: and through his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of honour and all noble deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed, and he called, “I strike upon thy side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The caitiffs!” “Nay,” said Pelleas, “but forbear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He needs no aid who doth his lady’s will.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Gawain, looking at the villainy done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbore, but in his heat and eagerness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled and quivered, as the dog, withheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment from the vermin that he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, shivers, ere he springs and kills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Pelleas overthrew them, one to three;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they rose up, and bound, and brought him in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then first her anger, leaving Pelleas, burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full on her knights in many an evil name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of craven, weakling, and thrice-beaten hound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yet, take him, ye that scarce are fit to touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far less to bind, your victor, and thrust him out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let who will release him from his bonds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if he comes again”⁠—there she brake short;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pelleas answered, “Lady, for indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved you and I deemed you beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot brook to see your beauty marred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through evil spite: and if ye love me not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot bear to dream you so forsworn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had liefer ye were worthy of my love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to be loved again of you⁠—farewell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though ye kill my hope, not yet my love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vex not yourself: ye will not see me more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus he spake, she gazed upon the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of princely bearing, though in bonds, and thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why have I pushed him from me? this man loves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If love there be: yet him I loved not. Why?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I deemed him fool? yea, so? or that in him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A something⁠—was it nobler than myself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed my reproach? He is not of my kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not love me, did he know me well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, let him go⁠—and quickly.” And her knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed not, but thrust him bounden out of door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forth sprang Gawain, and loosed him from his bonds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flung them o’er the walls; and afterward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking his hands, as from a lazar’s rag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Faith of my body,” he said, “and art thou not⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea thou art he, whom late our Arthur made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knight of his table; yea and he that won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circlet? wherefore hast thou so defamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy brotherhood in me and all the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As let these caitiffs on thee work their will?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Pelleas answered, “O, their wills are hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom I won the circlet; and mine, hers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to be bounden, so to see her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marred though it be with spite and mockery now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other than when I found her in the woods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though she hath me bounden but in spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all to flout me, when they bring me in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me be bounden, I shall see her face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else must I die through mine unhappiness.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Gawain answered kindly though in scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, let my lady bind me if she will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let my lady beat me if she will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But an she send her delegate to thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These fighting hands of mine⁠—Christ kill me then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I will slice him handless by the wrist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let my lady sear the stump for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howl as he may. But hold me for your friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, ye know nothing: here I pledge my troth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, by the honour of the Table Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be leal to thee and work thy work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tame thy jailing princess to thine hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lend me thine horse and arms, and I will say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have slain thee. She will let me in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear the manner of thy fight and fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when I come within her counsels, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From prime to vespers will I chant thy praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As prowest knight and truest lover, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any have sung thee living, till she long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have thee back in lusty life again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be bound, save by white bonds and warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearer than freedom. Wherefore now thy horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And armour: let me go: be comforted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me three days to melt her fancy, and hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third night hence will bring thee news of gold.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Pelleas lent his horse and all his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving the goodly sword, his prize, and took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gawain’s, and said, “Betray me not, but help⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou not he whom men call light-of-love?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay,” said Gawain, “for women be so light.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then bounded forward to the castle walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised a bugle hanging from his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winded it, and that so musically</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the old echoes hidden in the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang out like hollow woods at hunting-tide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up ran a score of damsels to the tower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Avaunt,” they cried, “our lady loves thee not.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Gawain lifting up his vizor said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gawain am I, Gawain of Arthur’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have slain this Pelleas whom ye hate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold his horse and armour. Open gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will make you merry.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>And down they ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her damsels, crying to their lady, “Lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pelleas is dead⁠—he told us⁠—he that hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horse and armour: will ye let him in?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew him! Gawain, Gawain of the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gawain⁠—there he waits below the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blowing his bugle as who should say him nay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, leave given, straight on through open door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode Gawain, whom she greeted courteously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dead, is it so?” she asked. “Ay, ay,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And oft in dying cried upon your name.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pity on him,” she answered, “a good knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never let me bide one hour at peace.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ay,” thought Gawain, “and you be fair enow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I to your dead man have given my troth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whom ye loathe, him will I make you love.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So those three days, aimless about the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in a doubt, Pelleas wandering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited, until the third night brought a moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With promise of large light on woods and ways.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hot was the night and silent; but a sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gawain ever coming, and this lay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Pelleas had heard sung before the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seen her sadden listening⁠—vext his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marred his rest⁠—“A worm within the rose.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A rose, but one, none other rose had I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rose, one rose, and this was wondrous fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rose, a rose that gladdened earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rose, my rose, that sweetened all mine air⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cared not for the thorns; the thorns were there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One rose, a rose to gather by and by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rose, a rose, to gather and to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rose but one⁠—what other rose had I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One rose, my rose; a rose that will not die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dies who loves it⁠—if the worm be there.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This tender rhyme, and evermore the doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why lingers Gawain with his golden news?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shook him that he could not rest, but rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere midnight to her walls, and bound his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by the gates. Wide open were the gates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no watch kept; and in through these he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard but his own steps, and his own heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beating, for nothing moved but his own self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own shadow. Then he crost the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spied not any light in hall or bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But saw the postern portal also wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yawning; and up a slope of garden, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of roses white and red, and brambles mixt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overgrowing them, went on, and found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here too, all hushed below the mellow moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that one rivulet from a tiny cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came lightening downward, and so spilt itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the roses, and was lost again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then was he ware of three pavilions reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the bushes, gilden-peakt: in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red after revel, droned her lurdane knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slumbering, and their three squires across their feet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one, their malice on the placid lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frozen by sweet sleep, four of her damsels lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the third, the circlet of the jousts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound on her brow, were Gawain and Ettarre.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Back, as a hand that pushes through the leaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find a nest and feels a snake, he drew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back, as a coward slinks from what he fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cope with, or a traitor proven, or hound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten, did Pelleas in an utter shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creep with his shadow through the court again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fingering at his sword-handle until he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on the castle-bridge once more, and thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will go back, and slay them where they lie.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so went back, and seeing them yet in sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Ye, that so dishallow the holy sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your sleep is death,” and drew the sword, and thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What! slay a sleeping knight? the King hath bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sworn me to this brotherhood;” again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas that ever a knight should be so false.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned, and so returned, and groaning laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked sword athwart their naked throats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There left it, and them sleeping; and she lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circlet of her tourney round her brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sword of the tourney across her throat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And forth he past, and mounting on his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared at her towers that, larger than themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their own darkness, thronged into the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then crushed the saddle with his thighs, and clenched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands, and maddened with himself and moaned:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Would they have risen against me in their blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the last day? I might have answered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even before high God. O towers so strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge, solid, would that even while I gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crack of earthquake shivering to your base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Split you, and Hell burst up your harlot roofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bellowing, and charred you through and through within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black as the harlot’s heart⁠—hollow as a skull!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the fierce east scream through your eyelet-holes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirl the dust of harlots round and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dung and nettles! hiss, snake⁠—I saw him there⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the fox bark, let the wolf yell. Who yells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the still sweet summer night, but I⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, the poor Pelleas whom she called her fool?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool, beast⁠—he, she, or I? myself most fool;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beast too, as lacking human wit⁠—disgraced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishonoured all for trial of true love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love?⁠—we be all alike: only the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath made us fools and liars. O noble vows!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O great and sane and simple race of brutes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That own no lust because they have no law!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For why should I have loved her to my shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loathe her, as I loved her to my shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never loved her, I but lusted for her⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>He dashed the rowel into his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bounded forth and vanished through the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then she, that felt the cold touch on her throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaking knew the sword, and turned herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Gawain: “Liar, for thou hast not slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Pelleas! here he stood, and might have slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me and thyself.” And he that tells the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says that her ever-veering fancy turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pelleas, as the one true knight on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only lover; and through her love her life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasted and pined, desiring him in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he by wild and way, for half the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over hard and soft, striking the sod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the soft, the spark from off the hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode till the star above the wakening sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside that tower where Percivale was cowled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glanced from the rosy forehead of the dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so the words were flashed into his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not whence or wherefore: “O sweet star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure on the virgin forehead of the dawn!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he would have wept, but felt his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harder and drier than a fountain bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In summer: thither came the village girls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lingered talking, and they come no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the sweet heavens have filled it from the heights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again with living waters in the change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of seasons: hard his eyes; harder his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed; but so weary were his limbs, that he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gasping, “Of Arthur’s hall am I, but here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here let me rest and die,” cast himself down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gulfed his griefs in inmost sleep; so lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till shaken by a dream, that Gawain fired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hall of Merlin, and the morning star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reeled in the smoke, brake into flame, and fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He woke, and being ware of someone nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent hands upon him, as to tear him, crying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“False! and I held thee pure as Guinevere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Percivale stood near him and replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Am I but false as Guinevere is pure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or art thou mazed with dreams? or being one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our free-spoken Table hast not heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Lancelot”⁠—there he checked himself and paused.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then fared it with Sir Pelleas as with one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gets a wound in battle, and the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made it plunges through the wound again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pricks it deeper: and he shrank and wailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is the Queen false?” and Percivale was mute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have any of our Round Table held their vows?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Percivale made answer not a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is the King true?” “The King!” said Percivale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why then let men couple at once with wolves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What! art thou mad?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>But Pelleas, leaping up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran through the doors and vaulted on his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fled: small pity upon his horse had he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or on himself, or any, and when he met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cripple, one that held a hand for alms⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunched as he was, and like an old dwarf-elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That turns its back upon the salt blast, the boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paused not, but overrode him, shouting, “False,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And false with Gawain!” and so left him bruised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And battered, and fled on, and hill and wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went ever streaming by him till the gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That follows on the turning of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened the common path: he twitched the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made his beast that better knew it, swerve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now off it and now on; but when he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High up in heaven the hall that Merlin built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blackening against the dead-green stripes of even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Black nest of rats,” he groaned, “ye build too high.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not long thereafter from the city gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Issued Sir Lancelot riding airily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm with a gracious parting from the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace at his heart, and gazing at a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marvelling what it was: on whom the boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the silent seeded meadow-grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne, clashed: and Lancelot, saying, “What name hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ridest here so blindly and so hard?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No name, no name,” he shouted, “a scourge am I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lash the treasons of the Table Round.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, but thy name?” “I have many names,” he cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am wrath and shame and hate and evil fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a poisonous wind I pass to blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blaze the crime of Lancelot and the Queen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“First over me,” said Lancelot, “shalt thou pass.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fight therefore,” yelled the youth, and either knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew back a space, and when they closed, at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weary steed of Pelleas floundering flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rider, who called out from the dark field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou art as false as Hell: slay me: I have no sword.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Lancelot, “Yea, between thy lips⁠—and sharp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here I will disedge it by thy death.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Slay then,” he shrieked, “my will is to be slain,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot, with his heel upon the fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling his eyes, a moment stood, then spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rise, weakling; I am Lancelot; say thy say.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Lancelot slowly rode his warhorse back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Camelot, and Sir Pelleas in brief while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught his unbroken limbs from the dark field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And followed to the city. It chanced that both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brake into hall together, worn and pale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There with her knights and dames was Guinevere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full wonderingly she gazed on Lancelot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon returned, and then on Pelleas, him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had not greeted her, but cast himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on a bench, hard-breathing. “Have ye fought?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She asked of Lancelot. “Ay, my Queen,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And hast thou overthrown him?” “Ay, my Queen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she, turning to Pelleas, “O young knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath the great heart of knighthood in thee failed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far thou canst not bide, unfrowardly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fall from him?” Then, for he answered not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or hast thou other griefs? If I, the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May help them, loose thy tongue, and let me know.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pelleas lifted up an eye so fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She quailed; and he, hissing “I have no sword,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang from the door into the dark. The Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked hard upon her lover, he on her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each foresaw the dolorous day to be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all talk died, as in a grove all song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shadow of some bird of prey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a long silence came upon the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Modred thought, “The time is hard at hand.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
