<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Holy Grail</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-holy-grail" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Holy Grail</h2>
			<p>
				<span>From noiseful arms, and acts of prowess done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tournament or tilt, Sir Percivale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Arthur and his knighthood called The Pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had passed into the silent life of prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise, fast, and alms; and leaving for the cowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helmet in an abbey far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Camelot, there, and not long after, died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And one, a fellow-monk among the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosius, loved him much beyond the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honoured him, and wrought into his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A way by love that wakened love within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To answer that which came: and as they sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a world-old yew-tree, darkening half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloisters, on a gustful April morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That puffed the swaying branches into smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above them, ere the summer when he died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monk Ambrosius questioned Percivale:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother, I have seen this yew-tree smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring after spring, for half a hundred years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never have I known the world without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever strayed beyond the pale: but thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first thou camest⁠—such a courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake through the limbs and in the voice⁠—I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one of those who eat in Arthur’s hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For good ye are and bad, and like to coins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some true, some light, but every one of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamped with the image of the King; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, what drove thee from the Table Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother? was it earthly passion crost?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay,” said the knight; “for no such passion mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the sweet vision of the Holy Grail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove me from all vainglories, rivalries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earthly heats that spring and sparkle out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us in the jousts, while women watch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wins, who falls; and waste the spiritual strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within us, better offered up to Heaven.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the monk: “The Holy Grail!⁠—I trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are green in Heaven’s eyes; but here too much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We moulder⁠—as to things without I mean⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet one of your own knights, a guest of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told us of this in our refectory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But spake with such a sadness and so low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We heard not half of what he said. What is it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phantom of a cup that comes and goes?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, monk! what phantom?” answered Percivale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The cup, the cup itself, from which our Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank at the last sad supper with his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, from the blessed land of Aromat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the day of darkness, when the dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went wandering o’er Moriah⁠—the good saint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arimathaean Joseph, journeying brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Glastonbury, where the winter thorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blossoms at Christmas, mindful of our Lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there awhile it bode; and if a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could touch or see it, he was healed at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By faith, of all his ills. But then the times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew to such evil that the holy cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was caught away to Heaven, and disappeared.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the monk: “From our old books I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Joseph came of old to Glastonbury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the heathen Prince, Arviragus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave him an isle of marsh whereon to build;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he built with wattles from the marsh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little lonely church in days of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so they say, these books of ours, but seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute of this miracle, far as I have read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who first saw the holy thing today?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A woman,” answered Percivale, “a nun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one no further off in blood from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than sister; and if ever holy maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With knees of adoration wore the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A holy maid; though never maiden glowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that was in her earlier maidenhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a fervent flame of human love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which being rudely blunted, glanced and shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to holy things; to prayer and praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gave herself, to fast and alms. And yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nun as she was, the scandal of the Court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sin against Arthur and the Table Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strange sound of an adulterous race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the iron grating of her cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat, and she prayed and fasted all the more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And he to whom she told her sins, or what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her all but utter whiteness held for sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man wellnigh a hundred winters old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake often with her of the Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A legend handed down through five or six,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each of these a hundred winters old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our Lord’s time. And when King Arthur made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Table Round, and all men’s hearts became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean for a season, surely he had thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now the Holy Grail would come again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sin broke out. Ah, Christ, that it would come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heal the world of all their wickedness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O Father!’ asked the maiden, ‘might it come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me by prayer and fasting?’ ‘Nay,’ said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I know not, for thy heart is pure as snow.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so she prayed and fasted, till the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone, and the wind blew, through her, and I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She might have risen and floated when I saw her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For on a day she sent to speak with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she came to speak, behold her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond my knowing of them, beautiful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all knowing of them, wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful in the light of holiness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ‘O my brother Percivale,’ she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sweet brother, I have seen the Holy Grail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, waked at dead of night, I heard a sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of a silver horn from o’er the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blown, and I thought, “It is not Arthur’s use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hunt by moonlight;” and the slender sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a distance beyond distance grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming upon me⁠—O never harp nor horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor aught we blow with breath, or touch with hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was like that music as it came; and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamed through my cell a cold and silver beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose-red with beatings in it, as if alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all the white walls of my cell were dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rosy colours leaping on the wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the music faded, and the Grail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past, and the beam decayed, and from the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosy quiverings died into the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now the Holy Thing is here again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us, brother, fast thou too and pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell thy brother knights to fast and pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so perchance the vision may be seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thee and those, and all the world be healed.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then leaving the pale nun, I spake of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all men; and myself fasted and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always, and many among us many a week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fasted and prayed even to the uttermost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expectant of the wonder that would be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And one there was among us, ever moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us in white armour, Galahad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘God make thee good as thou art beautiful,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Arthur, when he dubbed him knight; and none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In so young youth, was ever made a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Galahad; and this Galahad, when he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sister’s vision, filled me with amaze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes became so like her own, they seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hers, and himself her brother more than I.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sister or brother none had he; but some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called him a son of Lancelot, and some said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begotten by enchantment⁠—chatterers they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like birds of passage piping up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gape for flies⁠—we know not whence they come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when was Lancelot wanderingly lewd?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But she, the wan sweet maiden, shore away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean from her forehead all that wealth of hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which made a silken mat-work for her feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of this she plaited broad and long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strong sword-belt, and wove with silver thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crimson in the belt a strange device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crimson grail within a silver beam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw the bright boy-knight, and bound it on him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, ‘My knight, my love, my knight of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, my love, whose love is one with mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, maiden, round thee, maiden, bind my belt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth, for thou shalt see what I have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And break through all, till one will crown thee king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the spiritual city:” and as she spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sent the deathless passion in her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through him, and made him hers, and laid her mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On him, and he believed in her belief.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then came a year of miracle: O brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our great hall there stood a vacant chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned by Merlin ere he past away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carven with strange figures; and in and out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The figures, like a serpent, ran a scroll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of letters in a tongue no man could read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Merlin called it ‘The Siege perilous,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perilous for good and ill; ‘for there,’ he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘No man could sit but he should lose himself:’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once by misadvertence Merlin sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own chair, and so was lost; but he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galahad, when he heard of Merlin’s doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried, ‘If I lose myself, I save myself!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then on a summer night it came to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the great banquet lay along the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Galahad would sit down in Merlin’s chair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And all at once, as there we sat, we heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cracking and a riving of the roofs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rending, and a blast, and overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thunder, and in the thunder was a cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the blast there smote along the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beam of light seven times more clear than day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down the long beam stole the Holy Grail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All over covered with a luminous cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none might see who bare it, and it past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But every knight beheld his fellow’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a glory, and all the knights arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And staring each at other like dumb men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, till I found a voice and sware a vow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I sware a vow before them all, that I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I had not seen the Grail, would ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twelvemonth and a day in quest of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until I found and saw it, as the nun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sister saw it; and Galahad sware the vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And good Sir Bors, our Lancelot’s cousin, sware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot sware, and many among the knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gawain sware, and louder than the rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the monk Ambrosius, asking him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What said the King? Did Arthur take the vow?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, for my lord,” said Percivale, “the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not in hall: for early that same day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scaped through a cavern from a bandit hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An outraged maiden sprang into the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying on help: for all her shining hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was smeared with earth, and either milky arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red-rent with hooks of bramble, and all she wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn as a sail that leaves the rope is torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tempest: so the King arose and went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smoke the scandalous hive of those wild bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made such honey in his realm. Howbeit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some little of this marvel he too saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning o’er the plain that then began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To darken under Camelot; whence the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up, calling aloud, ‘Lo, there! the roofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our great hall are rolled in thunder-smoke!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray Heaven, they be not smitten by the bolt.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For dear to Arthur was that hall of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As having there so oft with all his knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasted, and as the stateliest under heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother, had you known our mighty hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Merlin built for Arthur long ago!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the sacred mount of Camelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the dim rich city, roof by roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tower after tower, spire beyond spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By grove, and garden-lawn, and rushing brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbs to the mighty hall that Merlin built.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And four great zones of sculpture, set betwixt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a mystic symbol, gird the hall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the lowest beasts are slaying men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the second men are slaying beasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the third are warriors, perfect men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the fourth are men with growing wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over all one statue in the mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur, made by Merlin, with a crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peaked wings pointed to the Northern Star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eastward fronts the statue, and the crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both the wings are made of gold, and flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sunrise till the people in far fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasted so often by the heathen hordes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold it, crying, ‘We have still a King.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And, brother, had you known our hall within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broader and higher than any in all the lands!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where twelve great windows blazon Arthur’s wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the light that falls upon the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams through the twelve great battles of our King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, one there is, and at the eastern end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wealthy with wandering lines of mount and mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Arthur finds the brand Excalibur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And also one to the west, and counter to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blank: and who shall blazon it? when and how?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O there, perchance, when all our wars are done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brand Excalibur will be cast away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So to this hall full quickly rode the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In horror lest the work by Merlin wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreamlike, should on the sudden vanish, wrapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In unremorseful folds of rolling fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in he rode, and up I glanced, and saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden dragon sparkling over all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many of those who burnt the hold, their arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hacked, and their foreheads grimed with smoke, and seared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed, and in among bright faces, ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of the vision, prest: and then the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake to me, being nearest, ‘Percivale,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Because the hall was all in tumult⁠—some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowing, and some protesting), ‘what is this?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother, when I told him what had chanced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sister’s vision, and the rest, his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkened, as I have seen it more than once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When some brave deed seemed to be done in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darken; and ‘Woe is me, my knights,’ he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Had I been here, ye had not sworn the vow.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold was mine answer, ‘Had thyself been here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My King, thou wouldst have sworn.’ ‘Yea, yea,’ said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Art thou so bold and hast not seen the Grail?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Nay, lord, I heard the sound, I saw the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since I did not see the Holy Thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sware a vow to follow it till I saw.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then when he asked us, knight by knight, if any</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen it, all their answers were as one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Nay, lord, and therefore have we sworn our vows.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Lo now,’ said Arthur, ‘have ye seen a cloud?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What go ye into the wilderness to see?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then Galahad on the sudden, and in a voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrilling along the hall to Arthur, called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘But I, Sir Arthur, saw the Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the Holy Grail and heard a cry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Galahad, and O Galahad, follow me.” ’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Ah, Galahad, Galahad,’ said the King, ‘for such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou art is the vision, not for these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy holy nun and thou have seen a sign⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holier is none, my Percivale, than she⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign to maim this Order which I made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye, that follow but the leader’s bell’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Brother, the King was hard upon his knights)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Taliessin is our fullest throat of song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one hath sung and all the dumb will sing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lancelot is Lancelot, and hath overborne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five knights at once, and every younger knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unproven, holds himself as Lancelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till overborne by one, he learns⁠—and ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are ye? Galahads?⁠—no, nor Percivales’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For thus it pleased the King to range me close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After Sir Galahad); ‘nay,’ said he, ‘but men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With strength and will to right the wronged, of power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay the sudden heads of violence flat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knights that in twelve great battles splashed and dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strong White Horse in his own heathen blood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one hath seen, and all the blind will see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, since your vows are sacred, being made:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet⁠—for ye know the cries of all my realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass through this hall⁠—how often, O my knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your places being vacant at my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This chance of noble deeds will come and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unchallenged, while ye follow wandering fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in the quagmire! Many of you, yea most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return no more: ye think I show myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too dark a prophet: come now, let us meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morrow morn once more in one full field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gracious pastime, that once more the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before ye leave him for this Quest, may count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yet-unbroken strength of all his knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing in that Order which he made.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>  “So when the sun broke next from under ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the great table of our Arthur closed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clashed in such a tourney and so full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many lances broken⁠—never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Camelot seen the like, since Arthur came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I myself and Galahad, for a strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in us from this vision, overthrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many knights that all the people cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And almost burst the barriers in their heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouting, ‘Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But when the next day brake from under ground⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O brother, had you known our Camelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by old kings, age after age, so old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King himself had fears that it would fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strange, and rich, and dim; for where the roofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tottered toward each other in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met foreheads all along the street of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who watched us pass; and lower, and where the long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich galleries, lady-laden, weighed the necks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dragons clinging to the crazy walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thicker than drops from thunder, showers of flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell as we past; and men and boys astride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On wyvern, lion, dragon, griffin, swan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At all the corners, named us each by name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling, ‘God speed!’ but in the ways below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knights and ladies wept, and rich and poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept, and the King himself could hardly speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grief, and all in middle street the Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rode by Lancelot, wailed and shrieked aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This madness has come on us for our sins.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to the Gate of the three Queens we came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Arthur’s wars are rendered mystically,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thence departed every one his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I was lifted up in heart, and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all my late-shown prowess in the lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How my strong lance had beaten down the knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many and famous names; and never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heaven appeared so blue, nor earth so green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all my blood danced in me, and I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should light upon the Holy Grail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thereafter, the dark warning of our King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That most of us would follow wandering fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came like a driving gloom across my mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then every evil word I had spoken once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every evil thought I had thought of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every evil deed I ever did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke and cried, ‘This Quest is not for thee.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifting up mine eyes, I found myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, and in a land of sand and thorns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was thirsty even unto death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, too, cried, ‘This Quest is not for thee.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And on I rode, and when I thought my thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would slay me, saw deep lawns, and then a brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one sharp rapid, where the crisping white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played ever back upon the sloping wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took both ear and eye; and o’er the brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were apple-trees, and apples by the brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen, and on the lawns. ‘I will rest here,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said, ‘I am not worthy of the Quest;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even while I drank the brook, and ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goodly apples, all these things at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into dust, and I was left alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thirsting, in a land of sand and thorns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And then behold a woman at a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spinning; and fair the house whereby she sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kind the woman’s eyes and innocent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all her bearing gracious; and she rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening her arms to meet me, as who should say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Rest here;’ but when I touched her, lo! she, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into dust and nothing, and the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became no better than a broken shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in it a dead babe; and also this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into dust, and I was left alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And on I rode, and greater was my thirst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then flashed a yellow gleam across the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where it smote the plowshare in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plowman left his plowing, and fell down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it; where it glittered on her pail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The milkmaid left her milking, and fell down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it, and I knew not why, but thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The sun is rising,’ though the sun had risen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was I ware of one that on me moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In golden armour with a crown of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About a casque all jewels; and his horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In golden armour jewelled everywhere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the splendour came, flashing me blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seemed to me the Lord of all the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being so huge. But when I thought he meant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crush me, moving on me, lo! he, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened his arms to embrace me as he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And up I went and touched him, and he, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into dust, and I was left alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wearying in a land of sand and thorns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I rode on and found a mighty hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the top, a city walled: the spires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricked with incredible pinnacles into heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the gateway stirred a crowd; and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried to me climbing, ‘Welcome, Percivale!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mightiest and thou purest among men!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glad was I and clomb, but found at top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, nor any voice. And thence I past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far through a ruinous city, and I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man had once dwelt there; but there I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only one man of an exceeding age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Where is that goodly company,’ said I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘That so cried out upon me?’ and he had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce any voice to answer, and yet gasped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Whence and what art thou?’ and even as he spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into dust, and disappeared, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was left alone once more, and cried in grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Lo, if I find the Holy Grail itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And touch it, it will crumble into dust.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And thence I dropt into a lowly vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low as the hill was high, and where the vale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was lowest, found a chapel, and thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A holy hermit in a hermitage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom I told my phantoms, and he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O son, thou hast not true humility,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest virtue, mother of them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when the Lord of all things made Himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naked of glory for His mortal change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take thou my robe,” she said, “for all is thine,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all her form shone forth with sudden light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the angels were amazed, and she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed Him down, and like a flying star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led on the gray-haired wisdom of the east;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her thou hast not known: for what is this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou thoughtest of thy prowess and thy sins?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not lost thyself to save thyself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Galahad.’ When the hermit made an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silver armour suddenly Galahad shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before us, and against the chapel door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid lance, and entered, and we knelt in prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the hermit slaked my burning thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the sacring of the mass I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy elements alone; but he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Saw ye no more? I, Galahad, saw the Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Holy Grail, descend upon the shrine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the fiery face as of a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smote itself into the bread, and went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hither am I come; and never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath what thy sister taught me first to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Holy Thing, failed from my side, nor come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covered, but moving with me night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fainter by day, but always in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-red, and sliding down the blackened marsh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-red, and on the naked mountain top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-red, and in the sleeping mere below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-red. And in the strength of this I rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shattering all evil customs everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And past through Pagan realms, and made them mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clashed with Pagan hordes, and bore them down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke through all, and in the strength of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come victor. But my time is hard at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hence I go; and one will crown me king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the spiritual city; and come thou, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou shalt see the vision when I go.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“While thus he spake, his eye, dwelling on mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew me, with power upon me, till I grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One with him, to believe as he believed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when the day began to wane, we went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There rose a hill that none but man could climb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarred with a hundred wintry water-courses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storm at the top, and when we gained it, storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round us and death; for every moment glanced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His silver arms and gloomed: so quick and thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightnings here and there to left and right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck, till the dry old trunks about us, dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, rotten with a hundred years of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang into fire: and at the base we found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either hand, as far as eye could see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great black swamp and of an evil smell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part black, part whitened with the bones of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be crost, save that some ancient king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had built a way, where, linked with many a bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand piers ran into the great Sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Galahad fled along them bridge by bridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every bridge as quickly as he crost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang into fire and vanished, though I yearned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To follow; and thrice above him all the heavens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opened and blazed with thunder such as seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoutings of all the sons of God: and first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once I saw him far on the great Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silver-shining armour starry-clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his head the Holy Vessel hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in white samite or a luminous cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with exceeding swiftness ran the boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If boat it were⁠—I saw not whence it came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the heavens opened and blazed again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring, I saw him like a silver star⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had he set the sail, or had the boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Become a living creature clad with wings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his head the Holy Vessel hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redder than any rose, a joy to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now I knew the veil had been withdrawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in a moment when they blazed again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening, I saw the least of little stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on the waste, and straight beyond the star</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the spiritual city and all her spires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gateways in a glory like one pearl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No larger, though the goal of all the saints⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike from the sea; and from the star there shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rose-red sparkle to the city, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt, and I knew it was the Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never eyes on earth again shall see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fell the floods of heaven drowning the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how my feet recrost the deathful ridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No memory in me lives; but that I touched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chapel-doors at dawn I know; and thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking my war-horse from the holy man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad that no phantom vext me more, returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whence I came, the gate of Arthur’s wars.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O brother,” asked Ambrosius⁠—“for in sooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ancient books⁠—and they would win thee⁠—teem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only I find not there this Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With miracles and marvels like to these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all unlike; which oftentime I read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who read but on my breviary with ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till my head swims; and then go forth and pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the little thorpe that lies so close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And almost plastered like a martin’s nest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these old walls⁠—and mingle with our folk;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knowing every honest face of theirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as ever shepherd knew his sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every homely secret in their hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight myself with gossip and old wives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ills and aches, and teethings, lyings-in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mirthful sayings, children of the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have no meaning half a league away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lulling random squabbles when they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chafferings and chatterings at the market-cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoice, small man, in this small world of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, even in their hens and in their eggs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O brother, saving this Sir Galahad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came ye on none but phantoms in your quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, no woman?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Then Sir Percivale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All men, to one so bound by such a vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And women were as phantoms. O, my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why wilt thou shame me to confess to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How far I faltered from my quest and vow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For after I had lain so many nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bedmate of the snail and eft and snake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grass and burdock, I was changed to wan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meagre, and the vision had not come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I chanced upon a goodly town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one great dwelling in the middle of it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither I made, and there was I disarmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By maidens each as fair as any flower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they led me into hall, behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Princess of that castle was the one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, and that one only, who had ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made my heart leap; for when I moved of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slender page about her father’s hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she a slender maiden, all my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went after her with longing: yet we twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had never kissed a kiss, or vowed a vow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I came upon her once again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one had wedded her, and he was dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his land and wealth and state were hers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while I tarried, every day she set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet richer than the day before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By me; for all her longing and her will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was toward me as of old; till one fair morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I walking to and fro beside a stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flashed across her orchard underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her castle-walls, she stole upon my walk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calling me the greatest of all knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embraced me, and so kissed me the first time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave herself and all her wealth to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I remembered Arthur’s warning word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That most of us would follow wandering fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Quest faded in my heart. Anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heads of all her people drew to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With supplication both of knees and tongue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘We have heard of thee: thou art our greatest knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Lady says it, and we well believe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wed thou our Lady, and rule over us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt be as Arthur in our land.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O me, my brother! but one night my vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burnt me within, so that I rose and fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wailed and wept, and hated mine own self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even the Holy Quest, and all but her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then after I was joined with Galahad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cared not for her, nor anything upon earth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then said the monk, “Poor men, when yule is cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be content to sit by little fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this am I, so that ye care for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever so little; yea, and blest be Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That brought thee here to this poor house of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all the brethren are so hard, to warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My cold heart with a friend: but O the pity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find thine own first love once more⁠—to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold her a wealthy bride within thine arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or all but hold, and then⁠—cast her aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foregoing all her sweetness, like a weed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we that want the warmth of double life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We that are plagued with dreams of something sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond all sweetness in a life so rich⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, blessed Lord, I speak too earthlywise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing I never strayed beyond the cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But live like an old badger in his earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With earth about him everywhere, despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All fast and penance. Saw ye none beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None of your knights?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yea so,” said Percivale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“One night my pathway swerving east, I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pelican on the casque of our Sir Bors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in the middle of the rising moon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And toward him spurred, and hailed him, and he me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each made joy of either; then he asked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Where is he? hast thou seen him⁠—Lancelot?⁠—Once,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said good Sir Bors, ‘he dashed across me⁠—mad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maddening what he rode: and when I cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ridest thou then so hotly on a quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So holy,” Lancelot shouted, “Stay me not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have been the sluggard, and I ride apace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now there is a lion in the way.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So vanished.’</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Then Sir Bors had ridden on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Softly, and sorrowing for our Lancelot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because his former madness, once the talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scandal of our table, had returned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Lancelot’s kith and kin so worship him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ill to him is ill to them; to Bors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the rest: he well had been content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to have seen, so Lancelot might have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Holy Cup of healing; and, indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being so clouded with his grief and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small heart was his after the Holy Quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If God would send the vision, well: if not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Quest and he were in the hands of Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And then, with small adventure met, Sir Bors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode to the lonest tract of all the realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found a people there among their crags,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our race and blood, a remnant that were left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paynim amid their circles, and the stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pitch up straight to heaven: and their wise men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were strong in that old magic which can trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wandering of the stars, and scoffed at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this high Quest as at a simple thing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told him he followed⁠—almost Arthur’s words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mocking fire: ‘what other fire than he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby the blood beats, and the blossom blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sea rolls, and all the world is warmed?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when his answer chafed them, the rough crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing he had a difference with their priests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized him, and bound and plunged him into a cell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great piled stones; and lying bounden there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In darkness through innumerable hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard the hollow-ringing heavens sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over him till by miracle⁠—what else?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy as it was, a great stone slipt and fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as no wind could move: and through the gap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glimmered the streaming scud: then came a night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still as the day was loud; and through the gap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seven clear stars of Arthur’s Table Round⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, brother, so one night, because they roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through such a round in heaven, we named the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing in ourselves and in our King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these, like bright eyes of familiar friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In on him shone: ‘And then to me, to me,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said good Sir Bors, ‘beyond all hopes of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who scarce had prayed or asked it for myself⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the seven clear stars⁠—O grace to me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In colour like the fingers of a hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before a burning taper, the sweet Grail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided and past, and close upon it pealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sharp quick thunder.’ Afterwards, a maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who kept our holy faith among her kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secret, entering, loosed and let him go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the monk: “And I remember now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pelican on the casque: Sir Bors it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who spake so low and sadly at our board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty reverent at our grace was he:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A square-set man and honest; and his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An out-door sign of all the warmth within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiled with his lips⁠—a smile beneath a cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But heaven had meant it for a sunny one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, ay, Sir Bors, who else? But when ye reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, found ye all your knights returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or was there sooth in Arthur’s prophecy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, and what said each, and what the King?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answered Percivale: “And that can I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, and truly; since the living words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of so great men as Lancelot and our King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass not from door to door and out again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sit within the house. O, when we reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city, our horses stumbling as they trode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On heaps of ruin, hornless unicorns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cracked basilisks, and splintered cockatrices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shattered talbots, which had left the stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raw, that they fell from, brought us to the hall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And there sat Arthur on the dais-throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those that had gone out upon the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasted and worn, and but a tithe of them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those that had not, stood before the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when he saw me, rose, and bad me hail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, ‘A welfare in thine eye reproves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our fear of some disastrous chance for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hill, or plain, at sea, or flooding ford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fierce a gale made havoc here of late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the strange devices of our kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, shook this newer, stronger hall of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the statue Merlin moulded for us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-wrenched a golden wing; but now⁠—the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This vision⁠—hast thou seen the Holy Cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Joseph brought of old to Glastonbury?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So when I told him all thyself hast heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambrosius, and my fresh but fixt resolve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass away into the quiet life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He answered not, but, sharply turning, asked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gawain, ‘Gawain, was this Quest for thee?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Nay, lord,’ said Gawain, ‘not for such as I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I communed with a saintly man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who made me sure the Quest was not for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was much awearied of the Quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But found a silk pavilion in a field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merry maidens in it; and then this gale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore my pavilion from the tenting-pin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blew my merry maidens all about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all discomfort; yea, and but for this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My twelvemonth and a day were pleasant to me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He ceased; and Arthur turned to whom at first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw not, for Sir Bors, on entering, pushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athwart the throng to Lancelot, caught his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held it, and there, half-hidden by him, stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the King espied him, saying to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hail, Bors! if ever loyal man and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could see it, thou hast seen the Grail;’ and Bors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Ask me not, for I may not speak of it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw it;’ and the tears were in his eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then there remained but Lancelot, for the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake but of sundry perils in the storm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps, like him of Cana in Holy Writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Arthur kept his best until the last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou, too, my Lancelot,’ asked the king, ‘my friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our mightiest, hath this Quest availed for thee?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Our mightiest!’ answered Lancelot, with a groan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O King!’⁠—and when he paused, methought I spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dying fire of madness in his eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O King, my friend, if friend of thine I be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier are those that welter in their sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swine in the mud, that cannot see for slime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slime of the ditch: but in me lived a sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strange, of such a kind, that all of pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble, and knightly in me twined and clung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round that one sin, until the wholesome flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poisonous grew together, each as each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be plucked asunder; and when thy knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sware, I sware with them only in the hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could I touch or see the Holy Grail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might be plucked asunder. Then I spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one most holy saint, who wept and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That save they could be plucked asunder, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My quest were but in vain; to whom I vowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would work according as he willed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth I went, and while I yearned and strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tear the twain asunder in my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My madness came upon me as of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whipt me into waste fields far away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was I beaten down by little men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mean knights, to whom the moving of my sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shadow of my spear had been enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scare them from me once; and then I came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in my folly to the naked shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide flats, where nothing but coarse grasses grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such a blast, my King, began to blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loud a blast along the shore and sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye could not hear the waters for the blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though heapt in mounds and ridges all the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove like a cataract, and all the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swept like a river, and the clouded heavens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were shaken with the motion and the sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blackening in the sea-foam swayed a boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-swallowed in it, anchored with a chain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my madness to myself I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will embark and I will lose myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the great sea wash away my sin.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I burst the chain, I sprang into the boat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven days I drove along the dreary deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with me drove the moon and all the stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind fell, and on the seventh night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard the shingle grinding in the surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And felt the boat shock earth, and looking up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, the enchanted towers of Carbonek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A castle like a rock upon a rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With chasm-like portals open to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steps that met the breaker! there was none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood near it but a lion on each side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That kept the entry, and the moon was full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the boat I leapt, and up the stairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There drew my sword. With sudden-flaring manes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those two great beasts rose upright like a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each gript a shoulder, and I stood between;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when I would have smitten them, heard a voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Doubt not, go forward; if thou doubt, the beasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will tear thee piecemeal.” Then with violence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword was dashed from out my hand, and fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And up into the sounding hall I past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nothing in the sounding hall I saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bench nor table, painting on the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shield of knight; only the rounded moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the tall oriel on the rolling sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But always in the quiet house I heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear as a lark, high o’er me as a lark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sweet voice singing in the topmost tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the eastward: up I climbed a thousand steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pain: as in a dream I seemed to climb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever: at the last I reached a door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A light was in the crannies, and I heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Glory and joy and honour to our Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Holy Vessel of the Grail.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in my madness I essayed the door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It gave; and through a stormy glare, a heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a seventimes-heated furnace, I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blasted and burnt, and blinded as I was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a fierceness that I swooned away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, yet methought I saw the Holy Grail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All palled in crimson samite, and around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great angels, awful shapes, and wings and eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but for all my madness and my sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then my swooning, I had sworn I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which I saw; but what I saw was veiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered; and this Quest was not for me.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So speaking, and here ceasing, Lancelot left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hall long silent, till Sir Gawain⁠—nay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, I need not tell thee foolish words⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A reckless and irreverent knight was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now boldened by the silence of his King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, I will tell thee: ‘O King, my liege,’ he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hath Gawain failed in any quest of thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When have I stinted stroke in foughten field?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as for thine, my good friend Percivale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy holy nun and thou have driven men mad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, made our mightiest madder than our least.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by mine eyes and by mine ears I swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be deafer than the blue-eyed cat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice as blind as any noonday owl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To holy virgins in their ecstasies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforward.’</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“ ‘Deafer,’ said the blameless King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Gawain, and blinder unto holy things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope not to make thyself by idle vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being too blind to have desire to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if indeed there came a sign from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed are Bors, Lancelot and Percivale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these have seen according to their sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every fiery prophet in old times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the sacred madness of the bard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When God made music through them, could but speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His music by the framework and the chord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as ye saw it ye have spoken truth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Nay⁠—but thou errest, Lancelot: never yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could all of true and noble in knight and man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twine round one sin, whatever it might be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a closeness, but apart there grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that he were the swine thou spakest of,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some root of knighthood and pure nobleness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto see thou, that it may bear its flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And spake I not too truly, O my knights?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I too dark a prophet when I said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those who went upon the Holy Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That most of them would follow wandering fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in the quagmire?⁠—lost to me and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left me gazing at a barren board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a lean Order⁠—scarce returned a tithe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of those to whom the vision came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My greatest hardly will believe he saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another hath beheld it afar off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaving human wrongs to right themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cares but to pass into the silent life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one hath had the vision face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now his chair desires him here in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However they may crown him otherwhere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And some among you held, that if the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen the sight he would have sworn the vow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not easily, seeing that the King must guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which he rules, and is but as the hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom a space of land is given to plow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may not wander from the allotted field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his work be done; but, being done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let visions of the night or of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, as they will; and many a time they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until this earth he walks on seems not earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This light that strikes his eyeball is not light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This air that smites his forehead is not air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vision⁠—yea, his very hand and foot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In moments when he feels he cannot die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knows himself no vision to himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the high God a vision, nor that One</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rose again: ye have seen what ye have seen.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So spake the King: I knew not all he meant.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
