<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Coming of Arthur</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-coming-of-arthur" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Coming of Arthur</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Leodogran, the King of Cameliard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had one fair daughter, and none other child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was the fairest of all flesh on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guinevere, and in her his one delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For many a petty king ere Arthur came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruled in this isle, and ever waging war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each upon other, wasted all the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still from time to time the heathen host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarmed overseas, and harried what was left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so there grew great tracts of wilderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein the beast was ever more and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But man was less and less, till Arthur came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For first Aurelius lived and fought and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after him King Uther fought and died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But either failed to make the kingdom one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after these King Arthur for a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the puissance of his Table Round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew all their petty princedoms under him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their king and head, and made a realm, and reigned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the land of Cameliard was waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick with wet woods, and many a beast therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none or few to scare or chase the beast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that wild dog, and wolf and boar and bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came night and day, and rooted in the fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wallowed in the gardens of the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever and anon the wolf would steal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children and devour, but now and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her own brood lost or dead, lent her fierce teat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To human sucklings; and the children, housed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her foul den, there at their meat would growl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mock their foster mother on four feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, straightened, they grew up to wolf-like men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worse than the wolves. And King Leodogran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groaned for the Roman legions here again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Caesar’s eagle: then his brother king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urien, assailed him: last a heathen horde,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reddening the sun with smoke and earth with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the spike that split the mother’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spitting the child, brake on him, till, amazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not whither he should turn for aid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But⁠—for he heard of Arthur newly crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though not without an uproar made by those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cried, “He is not Uther’s son”⁠—the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent to him, saying, “Arise, and help us thou!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here between the man and beast we die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Arthur yet had done no deed of arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But heard the call, and came: and Guinevere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood by the castle walls to watch him pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since he neither wore on helm or shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden symbol of his kinglihood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rode a simple knight among his knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many of these in richer arms than he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saw him not, or marked not, if she saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One among many, though his face was bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Arthur, looking downward as he past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the light of her eyes into his life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite on the sudden, yet rode on, and pitched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tents beside the forest. Then he drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heathen; after, slew the beast, and felled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest, letting in the sun, and made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad pathways for the hunter and the knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so returned.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>For while he lingered there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A doubt that ever smouldered in the hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those great Lords and Barons of his realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed forth and into war: for most of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colleaguing with a score of petty kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made head against him, crying, “Who is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he should rule us? who hath proven him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Uther’s son? for lo! we look at him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find nor face nor bearing, limbs nor voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are like to those of Uther whom we knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the son of Gorlois, not the King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the son of Anton, not the King.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Arthur, passing thence to battle, felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travail, and throes and agonies of the life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desiring to be joined with Guinevere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thinking as he rode, “Her father said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there between the man and beast they die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I not lift her from this land of beasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to my throne, and side by side with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What happiness to reign a lonely king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vext⁠—O ye stars that shudder over me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O earth that soundest hollow under me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vext with waste dreams? for saving I be joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her that is the fairest under heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seem as nothing in the mighty world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot will my will, nor work my work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wholly, nor make myself in mine own realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victor and lord. But were I joined with her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then might we live together as one life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reigning with one will in everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have power on this dark land to lighten it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And power on this dead world to make it live.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereafter⁠—as he speaks who tells the tale⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Arthur reached a field-of-battle bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pitched pavilions of his foe, the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was all so clear about him, that he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smallest rock far on the faintest hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even in high day the morning star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when the King had set his banner broad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once from either side, with trumpet-blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouts, and clarions shrilling unto blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long-lanced battle let their horses run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Barons and the kings prevailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the King, as here and there that war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went swaying; but the Powers who walk the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made lightnings and great thunders over him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dazed all eyes, till Arthur by main might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mightier of his hands with every blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leading all his knighthood threw the kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carados, Urien, Cradlemont of Wales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claudias, and Clariance of Northumberland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King Brandagoras of Latangor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Anguisant of Erin, Morganore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lot of Orkney. Then, before a voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As dreadful as the shout of one who sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one who sins, and deems himself alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the world asleep, they swerved and brake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying, and Arthur called to stay the brands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hacked among the flyers, “Ho! they yield!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So like a painted battle the war stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silenced, the living quiet as the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the heart of Arthur joy was lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed upon his warrior whom he loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honoured most. “Thou dost not doubt me King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So well thine arm hath wrought for me today.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir and my liege,” he cried, “the fire of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descends upon thee in the battle-field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know thee for my King!” Whereat the two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each had warded either in the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sware on the field of death a deathless love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur said, “Man’s word is God in man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let chance what will, I trust thee to the death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then quickly from the foughten field he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His new-made knights, to King Leodogran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, “If I in aught have served thee well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me thy daughter Guinevere to wife.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whom when he heard, Leodogran in heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Debating⁠—“How should I that am a king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However much he holp me at my need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give my one daughter saving to a king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a king’s son?”⁠—lifted his voice, and called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hoary man, his chamberlain, to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trusted all things, and of him required</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His counsel: “Knowest thou aught of Arthur’s birth?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the hoary chamberlain and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir King, there be but two old men that know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each is twice as old as I; and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Merlin, the wise man that ever served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Uther through his magic art; and one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Merlin’s master (so they call him) Bleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who taught him magic, but the scholar ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the master, and so far, that Bleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid magic by, and sat him down, and wrote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things and whatsoever Merlin did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one great annal-book, where after-years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will learn the secret of our Arthur’s birth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom the King Leodogran replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O friend, had I been holpen half as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this King Arthur as by thee today,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then beast and man had had their share of me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But summon here before us yet once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulfius, and Brastias, and Bedivere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, when they came before him, the King said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have seen the cuckoo chased by lesser fowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reason in the chase: but wherefore now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do these your lords stir up the heat of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some calling Arthur born of Gorlois,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others of Anton? Tell me, ye yourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold ye this Arthur for King Uther’s son?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Ulfius and Brastias answered, “Ay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Bedivere, the first of all his knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knighted by Arthur at his crowning, spake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For bold in heart and act and word was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenever slander breathed against the King⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir, there be many rumours on this head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there be those who hate him in their hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call him baseborn, and since his ways are sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And theirs are bestial, hold him less than man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there be those who deem him more than man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dream he dropt from heaven: but my belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all this matter⁠—so ye care to learn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir, for ye know that in King Uther’s time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince and warrior Gorlois, he that held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tintagil castle by the Cornish sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wedded with a winsome wife, Ygerne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And daughters had she borne him⁠—one whereof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lot’s wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ever like a loyal sister cleaved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Arthur⁠—but a son she had not borne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Uther cast upon her eyes of love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she, a stainless wife to Gorlois,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loathed the bright dishonour of his love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Gorlois and King Uther went to war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overthrown was Gorlois and slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Uther in his wrath and heat besieged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ygerne within Tintagil, where her men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the mighty swarm about their walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left her and fled, and Uther entered in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was none to call to but himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, compassed by the power of the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enforced was she to wed him in her tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a shameful swiftness: afterward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not many moons, King Uther died himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaning and wailing for an heir to rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After him, lest the realm should go to wrack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that same night, the night of the new year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By reason of the bitterness and grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That vext his mother, all before his time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Arthur born, and all as soon as born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivered at a secret postern-gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Merlin, to be holden far apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until his hour should come; because the lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that fierce day were as the lords of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild beasts, and surely would have torn the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piecemeal among them, had they known; for each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sought to rule for his own self and hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many hated Uther for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gorlois. Wherefore Merlin took the child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave him to Sir Anton, an old knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ancient friend of Uther; and his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed the young prince, and reared him with her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no man knew. And ever since the lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have foughten like wild beasts among themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the realm has gone to wrack: but now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This year, when Merlin (for his hour had come)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought Arthur forth, and set him in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaiming, ‘Here is Uther’s heir, your king,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred voices cried, ‘Away with him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No king of ours! a son of Gorlois he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else the child of Anton, and no king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else baseborn.’ Yet Merlin through his craft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the people clamoured for a king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Arthur crowned; but after, the great lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banded, and so brake out in open war.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then while the King debated with himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Arthur were the child of shamefulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or born the son of Gorlois, after death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Uther’s son, and born before his time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whether there were truth in anything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said by these three, there came to Cameliard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Gawain and young Modred, her two sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lot’s wife, the Queen of Orkney, Bellicent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom as he could, not as he would, the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made feast for, saying, as they sat at meat,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A doubtful throne is ice on summer seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye come from Arthur’s court. Victor his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Report him! Yea, but ye⁠—think ye this king⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many those that hate him, and so strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So few his knights, however brave they be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath body enow to hold his foemen down?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O King,” she cried, “and I will tell thee: few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few, but all brave, all of one mind with him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was near him when the savage yells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Uther’s peerage died, and Arthur sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowned on the dais, and his warriors cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Be thou the king, and we will work thy will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love thee.’ Then the King in low deep tones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And simple words of great authority,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound them by so strait vows to his own self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when they rose, knighted from kneeling, some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were pale as at the passing of a ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some flushed, and others dazed, as one who wakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-blinded at the coming of a light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But when he spake and cheered his Table Round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With large, divine, and comfortable words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond my tongue to tell thee⁠—I beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From eye to eye through all their Order flash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A momentary likeness of the King:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ere it left their faces, through the cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those around it and the Crucified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the casement over Arthur, smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flame-colour, vert and azure, in three rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One falling upon each of three fair queens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood in silence near his throne, the friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur, gazing on him, tall, with bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet faces, who will help him at his need.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And there I saw mage Merlin, whose vast wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hundred winters are but as the hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of loyal vassals toiling for their liege.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And near him stood the Lady of the Lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knows a subtler magic than his own⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gave the King his huge cross-hilted sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby to drive the heathen out: a mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of incense curled about her, and her face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wellnigh was hidden in the minster gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there was heard among the holy hymns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice as of the waters, for she dwells</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in a deep; calm, whatsoever storms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May shake the world, and when the surface rolls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath power to walk the waters like our Lord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There likewise I beheld Excalibur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him at his crowning borne, the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rose from out the bosom of the lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur rowed across and took it⁠—rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With jewels, elfin Urim, on the hilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildering heart and eye⁠—the blade so bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That men are blinded by it⁠—on one side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graven in the oldest tongue of all this world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Take me,’ but turn the blade and ye shall see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And written in the speech ye speak yourself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Cast me away!’ And sad was Arthur’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking it, but old Merlin counselled him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Take thou and strike! the time to cast away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yet far-off.’ So this great brand the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took, and by this will beat his foemen down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereat Leodogran rejoiced, but thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sift his doubtings to the last, and asked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixing full eyes of question on her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The swallow and the swift are near akin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou art closer to this noble prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being his own dear sister;” and she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Daughter of Gorlois and Ygerne am I;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And therefore Arthur’s sister?” asked the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answered, “These be secret things,” and signed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those two sons to pass, and let them be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gawain went, and breaking into song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang out, and followed by his flying hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran like a colt, and leapt at all he saw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Modred laid his ear beside the doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there half-heard; the same that afterward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck for the throne, and striking found his doom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the Queen made answer, “What know I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For dark my mother was in eyes and hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dark in hair and eyes am I; and dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Gorlois, yea and dark was Uther too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wellnigh to blackness; but this King is fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the race of Britons and of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moreover, always in my mind I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry from out the dawning of my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mother weeping, and I hear her say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘O that ye had some brother, pretty one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard thee on the rough ways of the world.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay,” said the King, “and hear ye such a cry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when did Arthur chance upon thee first?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O King!” she cried, “and I will tell thee true:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found me first when yet a little maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten I had been for a little fault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof I was not guilty; and out I ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flung myself down on a bank of heath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hated this fair world and all therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept, and wished that I were dead; and he⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not whether of himself he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or brought by Merlin, who, they say, can walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen at pleasure⁠—he was at my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake sweet words, and comforted my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dried my tears, being a child with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a time he came, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I grew greater grew with me; and sad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times he seemed, and sad with him was I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern too at times, and then I loved him not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sweet again, and then I loved him well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now of late I see him less and less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But those first days had golden hours for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then I surely thought he would be king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But let me tell thee now another tale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Bleys, our Merlin’s master, as they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died but of late, and sent his cry to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear him speak before he left his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrunk like a fairy changeling lay the mage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when I entered told me that himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Merlin ever served about the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uther, before he died; and on the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Uther in Tintagil past away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaning and wailing for an heir, the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the still King, and passing forth to breathe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the castle gateway by the chasm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending through the dismal night⁠—a night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the bounds of heaven and earth were lost⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld, so high upon the dreary deeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed in heaven, a ship, the shape thereof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dragon winged, and all from stern to stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright with a shining people on the decks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gone as soon as seen. And then the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropt to the cove, and watched the great sea fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave after wave, each mightier than the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till last, a ninth one, gathering half the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of voices, slowly rose and plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring, and all the wave was in a flame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down the wave and in the flame was borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A naked babe, and rode to Merlin’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stoopt and caught the babe, and cried ‘The King!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here is an heir for Uther!’ And the fringe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that great breaker, sweeping up the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lashed at the wizard as he spake the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all at once all round him rose in fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the child and he were clothed in fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presently thereafter followed calm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free sky and stars: ‘And this the same child,’ he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Is he who reigns; nor could I part in peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till this were told.’ And saying this the seer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went through the strait and dreadful pass of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not ever to be questioned any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save on the further side; but when I met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merlin, and asked him if these things were truth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shining dragon and the naked child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending in the glory of the seas⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laughed as is his wont, and answered me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In riddling triplets of old time, and said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Rain, rain, and sun! a rainbow in the sky!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young man will be wiser by and by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man’s wit may wander ere he die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain, rain, and sun! a rainbow on the lea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truth is this to me, and that to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And truth or clothed or naked let it be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain, sun, and rain! and the free blossom blows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun, rain, and sun! and where is he who knows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great deep to the great deep he goes.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So Merlin riddling angered me; but thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear not to give this King thy only child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guinevere: so great bards of him will sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereafter; and dark sayings from of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ranging and ringing through the minds of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And echoed by old folk beside their fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For comfort after their wage-work is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak of the King; and Merlin in our time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath spoken also, not in jest, and sworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though men may wound him that he will not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But pass, again to come; and then or now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Utterly smite the heathen underfoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till these and all men hail him for their king.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake and King Leodogran rejoiced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But musing, “Shall I answer yea or nay?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubted, and drowsed, nodded and slept, and saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreaming, a slope of land that ever grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Field after field, up to a height, the peak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haze-hidden, and thereon a phantom king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now looming, and now lost; and on the slope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword rose, the hind fell, the herd was driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire glimpsed; and all the land from roof and rick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In drifts of smoke before a rolling wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamed to the peak, and mingled with the haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made it thicker; while the phantom king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent out at times a voice; and here or there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood one who pointed toward the voice, the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew on and burnt, crying, “No king of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No son of Uther, and no king of ours;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till with a wink his dream was changed, the haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descended, and the solid earth became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As nothing, but the King stood out in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowned. And Leodogran awoke, and sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulfius, and Brastias and Bedivere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the court of Arthur answering yea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Arthur charged his warrior whom he loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honoured most, Sir Lancelot, to ride forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring the Queen;⁠—and watched him from the gates:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lancelot past away among the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For then was latter April) and returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the flowers, in May, with Guinevere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom arrived, by Dubric the high saint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chief of the church in Britain, and before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stateliest of her altar-shrines, the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That morn was married, while in stainless white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair beginners of a nobler time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glorying in their vows and him, his knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood around him, and rejoicing in his joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far shone the fields of May through open door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred altar blossomed white with May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun of May descended on their King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gazed on all earth’s beauty in their Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled incense, and there past along the hymns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice as of the waters, while the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sware at the shrine of Christ a deathless love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur said, “Behold, thy doom is mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let chance what will, I love thee to the death!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the Queen replied with drooping eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“King and my lord, I love thee to the death!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holy Dubric spread his hands and spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Reign ye, and live and love, and make the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other, and may thy Queen be one with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all this Order of thy Table Round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fulfil the boundless purpose of their King!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Dubric said; but when they left the shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Lords from Rome before the portal stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In scornful stillness gazing as they past;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then while they paced a city all on fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sun and cloth of gold, the trumpets blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arthur’s knighthood sang before the King:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blow, trumpet, for the world is white with May;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow trumpet, the long night hath rolled away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow through the living world⁠—‘Let the King reign.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shall Rome or Heathen rule in Arthur’s realm?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flash brand and lance, fall battleaxe upon helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Strike for the King and live! his knights have heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That God hath told the King a secret word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blow trumpet! he will lift us from the dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow trumpet! live the strength and die the lust!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the King reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Strike for the King and die! and if thou diest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King is King, and ever wills the highest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the King reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blow, for our Sun is mighty in his May!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow, for our Sun is mightier day by day!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clang battleaxe, and clash brand! Let the King reign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The King will follow Christ, and we the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom high God hath breathed a secret thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall battleaxe, and flash brand! Let the King reign.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So sang the knighthood, moving to their hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There at the banquet those great Lords from Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slowly-fading mistress of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strode in, and claimed their tribute as of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Arthur spake, “Behold, for these have sworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wage my wars, and worship me their King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old order changeth, yielding place to new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we that fight for our fair father Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing that ye be grown too weak and old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the heathen from your Roman wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No tribute will we pay:” so those great lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew back in wrath, and Arthur strove with Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Arthur and his knighthood for a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were all one will, and through that strength the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew in the petty princedoms under him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fought, and in twelve great battles overcame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heathen hordes, and made a realm and reigned.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
