<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Passing of Arthur</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-passing-of-arthur" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Passing of Arthur</h2>
			<p>
				<span>That story which the bold Sir Bedivere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First made and latest left of all the knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told, when the man was no more than a voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the white winter of his age, to those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom he dwelt, new faces, other minds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For on their march to westward, Bedivere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who slowly paced among the slumbering host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard in his tent the moanings of the King:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I found Him in the shining of the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marked Him in the flowering of His fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in His ways with men I find Him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I waged His wars, and now I pass and die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O me! for why is all around us here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if some lesser god had made the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But had not force to shape it as he would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the High God behold it from beyond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And enter it, and make it beautiful?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else as if the world were wholly fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that these eyes of men are dense and dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have not power to see it as it is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perchance, because we see not to the close;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I, being simple, thought to work His will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have but stricken with the sword in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all whereon I leaned in wife and friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is traitor to my peace, and all my realm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reels back into the beast, and is no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My God, thou hast forgotten me in my death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay⁠—God my Christ⁠—I pass but shall not die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, ere that last weird battle in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came on Arthur sleeping, Gawain killed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lancelot’s war, the ghost of Gawain blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along a wandering wind, and past his ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went shrilling, “Hollow, hollow all delight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, King! tomorrow thou shalt pass away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell! there is an isle of rest for thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am blown along a wandering wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hollow, hollow, hollow all delight.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fainter onward, like wild birds that change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their season in the night and wail their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cloud to cloud, down the long wind the dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrilled; but in going mingled with dim cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the moonlit haze among the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of some lonely city sacked by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all is lost, and wife and child with wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass to new lords; and Arthur woke and called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who spake? A dream. O light upon the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine, Gawain, was the voice⁠—are these dim cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine? or doth all that haunts the waste and wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourn, knowing it will go along with me?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This heard the bold Sir Bedivere and spake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O me, my King, let pass whatever will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elves, and the harmless glamour of the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in their stead thy name and glory cling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all high places like a golden cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever: but as yet thou shalt not pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light was Gawain in life, and light in death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is Gawain, for the ghost is as the man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And care not thou for dreams from him, but rise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hear the steps of Modred in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with him many of thy people, and knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once thine, whom thou hast loved, but grosser grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than heathen, spitting at their vows and thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right well in heart they know thee for the King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise, go forth and conquer as of old.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Far other is this battle in the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto we move, than when we strove in youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brake the petty kings, and fought with Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thrust the heathen from the Roman wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook him through the north. Ill doom is mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To war against my people and my knights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king who fights his people fights himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they my knights, who loved me once, the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strikes them dead is as my death to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet let us hence, and find or feel a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through this blind haze, which ever since I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One lying in the dust at Almesbury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath folded in the passes of the world.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rose the King and moved his host by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever pushed Sir Modred, league by league,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the sunset bound of Lyonnesse⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A land of old upheaven from the abyss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fire, to sink into the abyss again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long mountains ended in a coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ever-shifting sand, and far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phantom circle of a moaning sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the pursuer could pursue no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he that fled no further fly the King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, that day when the great light of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned at his lowest in the rolling year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever yet had Arthur fought a fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like this last, dim, weird battle of the west.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A death-white mist slept over sand and sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof the chill, to him who breathed it, drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down with his blood, till all his heart was cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With formless fear; and even on Arthur fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion, since he saw not whom he fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For friend and foe were shadows in the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And friend slew friend not knowing whom he slew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some had visions out of golden youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some beheld the faces of old ghosts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look in upon the battle; and in the mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was many a noble deed, many a base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chance and craft and strength in single fights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever and anon with host to host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shield-breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battleaxes on shattered helms, and shrieks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the Christ, of those who falling down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up for heaven, and only saw the mist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouts of heathen and the traitor knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oaths, insults, filth, and monstrous blasphemies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweat, writhings, anguish, labouring of the lungs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that close mist, and cryings for the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moans of the dying, and voices of the dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last, as by some one deathbed after wail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suffering, silence follows, or through death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or deathlike swoon, thus over all that shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save for some whisper of the seething seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dead hush fell; but when the dolorous day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew drearier toward twilight falling, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bitter wind, clear from the North, and blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mist aside, and with that wind the tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose, and the pale King glanced across the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle: but no man was moving there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any cry of Christian heard thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet of heathen; only the wan wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brake in among dead faces, to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swaying the helpless hands, and up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumbling the hollow helmets of the fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shivered brands that once had fought with Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rolling far along the gloomy shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of days of old and days to be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whiter than the mist that all day long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had held the field of battle was the King:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearest thou this great voice that shakes the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wastes the narrow realm whereon we move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beats upon the faces of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My dead, as though they had not died for me?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Bedivere, for on my heart hath fallen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion, till I know not what I am,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor whence I am, nor whether I be King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, I seem but King among the dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the bold Sir Bedivere: “My King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King everywhere! and so the dead have kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also will I worship thee as King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still thy life is whole, and still I live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love thee; but who hates thee, he that brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heathen back among us, yonder stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Modred, unharmed, the traitor of thine house.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the King: “My house hath been my doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But call not thou this traitor of my house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hath but dwelt beneath one roof with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My house are rather they who sware my vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, even while they brake them, owned me King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well for thee, saying in my dark hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all the purport of my throne hath failed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That quick or dead thou holdest me for King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King am I, whatsoever be their cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one last act of kinghood shalt thou see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, ere I pass.” And uttering this the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made at the man: then Modred smote his liege</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard on that helm which many a heathen sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had beaten thin; while Arthur at one blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striking the last stroke with Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew him, and all but slain himself, he fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So all day long the noise of battle rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the mountains by the winter sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until King Arthur’s Table, man by man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Arthur. Then, because his wound was deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore him to a chapel nigh the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A broken chancel with a broken cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stood on a dark strait of barren land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one side lay the Ocean, and on one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay a great water, and the moon was full.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The sequel of today unsolders all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goodliest fellowship of famous knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sleep⁠—the men I loved. I think that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall never more, at any future time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking about the gardens and the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Camelot, as in the days that were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I perish by this people which I made⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Merlin sware that I should come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rule once more; but, let what will be, be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am so deeply smitten through the helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That without help I cannot last till morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was my pride: for thou rememberest how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those old days, one summer noon, an arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose up from out the bosom of the lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the sword⁠—and how I rowed across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And took it, and have worn it, like a king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, wheresoever I am sung or told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In aftertime, this also shall be known:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now delay not: take Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fling him far into the middle mere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch what thou seest, and lightly bring me word.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aidless, alone, and smitten through the helm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little thing may harm a wounded man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I thy hest will all perform at full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, from the ruined shrine he stept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the moon athwart the place of tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By zigzag paths, and juts of pointed rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came on the shining levels of the lake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There drew he forth the brand Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er him, drawing it, the winter moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That both his eyes were dazzled as he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way and that dividing the swift mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In act to throw: but at the last it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better to leave Excalibur concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in the many-knotted waterflags,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whistled stiff and dry about the marge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strode he back slow to the wounded King.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou performed my mission which I gave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I heard the ripple washing in the reeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wild water lapping on the crag.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou hast betrayed thy nature and thy name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not rendering true answer, as beseemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For surer sign had followed, either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or voice, or else a motion of the mere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a shameful thing for men to lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then went Sir Bedivere the second time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counting the dewy pebbles, fixed in thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he saw the wonder of the hilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How curiously and strangely chased, he smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palms together, and he cried aloud:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And if indeed I cast the brand away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely a precious thing, one worthy note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should thus be lost forever from the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which might have pleased the eyes of many men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What good should follow this, if this were done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What harm, undone? Deep harm to disobey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing obedience is the bond of rule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it well to obey then, if a king demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An act unprofitable, against himself?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King is sick, and knows not what he does.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What record, or what relic of my lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be to aftertime, but empty breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rumours of a doubt? But were this kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone might show it at a joust of arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, ‘King Arthur’s sword, Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the hidden bases of the hills.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So might some old man speak in the aftertime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the people, winning reverence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now much honour and much fame were lost.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, clouded with his own conceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hid Excalibur the second time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so strode back slow to the wounded King.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I heard the water lapping on the crag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long ripple washing in the reeds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknightly, traitor-hearted! Woe is me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Authority forgets a dying king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid widowed of the power in his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bowed the will. I see thee what thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou, the latest-left of all my knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom should meet the offices of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either from lust of gold, or like a girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the third time may prosper, get thee hence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will arise and slay thee with my hands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the bulrush beds, and clutched the sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strongly wheeled and threw it. The great brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flashing round and round, and whirled in an arch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen where the moving isles of winter shock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night, with noises of the Northern Sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So flashed and fell the brand Excalibur:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And caught him by the hilt, and brandished him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times, and drew him under in the mere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightly went the other to the King.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now see I by thine eyes that this is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak out: what is it thou hast heard, or seen?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should blind my purpose, for I never saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though I live three lives of mortal men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great a miracle as yonder hilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I looked again, behold an arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That caught him by the hilt, and brandished him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times, and drew him under in the mere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My end draws nigh; ’tis time that I were gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear me to the margin; yet I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So saying, from the pavement he half rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remorsefully regarded through his tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have spoken, but he found not words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er both his shoulders drew the languid hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rising bore him through the place of tombs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, as he walked, King Arthur panted hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all the house is mute. So sighed the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muttering and murmuring at his ear, “Quick, quick!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear it is too late, and I shall die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger than human on the frozen hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard the deep behind him, and a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before. His own thought drove him like a goad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry clashed his harness in the icy caves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barren chasms, and all to left and right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bare black cliff clanged round him, as he based</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the long glories of the winter moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath them; and descending they were ware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the decks were dense with stately forms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream⁠—by these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three Queens with crowns of gold: and from them rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cry that shivered to the tingling stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as it were one voice, an agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lamentation, like a wind that shrills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night in a waste land, where no one comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hath come, since the making of the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then murmured Arthur, “Place me in the barge.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to the barge they came. There those three Queens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she, that rose the tallest of them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loosed the shattered casque, and chafed his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And called him by his name, complaining loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dropping bitter tears against a brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striped with dark blood: for all his face was white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And colourless, and like the withered moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his greaves and cuisses dashed with drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of onset; and the light and lustrous curls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made his forehead like a rising sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High from the dais-throne⁠—were parched with dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, clotted into points and hanging loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed with the knightly growth that fringed his lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So like a shattered column lay the King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From spur to plume a star of tournament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot through the lists at Camelot, and charged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the eyes of ladies and of kings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now I see the true old times are dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When every morning brought a noble chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every chance brought out a noble knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such times have been not since the light that led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the whole Round Table is dissolved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was an image of the mighty world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, the last, go forth companionless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the days darken round me, and the years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among new men, strange faces, other minds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And slowly answered Arthur from the barge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The old order changeth, yielding place to new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God fulfils himself in many ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort thyself: what comfort is in me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have lived my life, and that which I have done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May He within himself make pure! but thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou shouldst never see my face again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise like a fountain for me night and day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what are men better than sheep or goats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nourish a blind life within the brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both for themselves and those who call them friend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so the whole round earth is every way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now farewell. I am going a long way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these thou seest⁠—if indeed I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the island-valley of Avilion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-meadowed, happy, fair with orchard lawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So said he, and the barge with oar and sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revolving many memories, till the hull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked one black dot against the verge of dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the mere the wailing died away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when that moan had past for evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stillness of the dead world’s winter dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazed him, and he groaned, “The King is gone.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal came on him the weird rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From the great deep to the great deep he goes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat he slowly turned and slowly clomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last hard footstep of that iron crag;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence marked the black hull moving yet, and cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He passes to be King among the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after healing of his grievous wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He comes again; but⁠—if he come no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O me, be yon dark Queens in yon black boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shrieked and wailed, the three whereat we gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On that high day, when, clothed with living light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stood before his throne in silence, friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arthur, who should help him at his need?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from the dawn it seemed there came, but faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from beyond the limit of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the last echo born of a great cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around a king returning from his wars.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereat once more he moved about, and clomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the highest he could climb, and saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straining his eyes beneath an arch of hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thought he saw, the speck that bare the King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down that long water opening on the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere far off, pass on and on, and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From less to less and vanish into light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the new sun rose bringing the new year.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
