<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To the Queen</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="to-the-queen" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Queen</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O loyal to the royal in thyself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loyal to thy land, as this to thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear witness, that rememberable day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, pale as yet, and fever-worn, the Prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who scarce had plucked his flickering life again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From halfway down the shadow of the grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past with thee through thy people and their love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And London rolled one tide of joy through all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her trebled millions, and loud leagues of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And welcome! witness, too, the silent cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prayer of many a race and creed, and clime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thunderless lightnings striking under sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sunset and sunrise of all thy realm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that true North, whereof we lately heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strain to shame us “keep you to yourselves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loyal is too costly! friends⁠—your love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a burthen: loose the bond, and go.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this the tone of empire? here the faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That made us rulers? this, indeed, her voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meaning, whom the roar of Hougoumont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left mightiest of all peoples under heaven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What shock has fooled her since, that she should speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So feebly? wealthier⁠—wealthier⁠—hour by hour!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of Britain, or a sinking land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some third-rate isle half-lost among her seas?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There rang her voice, when the full city pealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee and thy Prince! The loyal to their crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are loyal to their own far sons, who love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our ocean-empire with her boundless homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever-broadening England, and her throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our vast Orient, and one isle, one isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knows not her own greatness: if she knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dreads it we are fallen.⁠—But thou, my Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for itself, but through thy living love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one to whom I made it o’er his grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred, accept this old imperfect tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New-old, and shadowing Sense at war with Soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ideal manhood closed in real man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than that gray king, whose name, a ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams like a cloud, man-shaped, from mountain peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still; or him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Geoffrey’s book, or him of Malleor’s, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched by the adulterous finger of a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hovered between war and wantonness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crownings and dethronements: take withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy poet’s blessing, and his trust that Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will blow the tempest in the distance back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thine and ours: for some are scared, who mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wisely or unwisely, signs of storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waverings of every vane with every wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wordy trucklings to the transient hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fierce or careless looseners of the faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Softness breeding scorn of simple life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Cowardice, the child of lust for gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Labour, with a groan and not a voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Art with poisonous honey stolen from France,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that which knows, but careful for itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that which knows not, ruling that which knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To its own harm: the goal of this great world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies beyond sight: yet⁠—if our slowly-grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowned Republic’s crowning common-sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saved her many times, not fail⁠—their fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are morning shadows huger than the shapes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cast them, not those gloomier which forego</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness of that battle in the West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all of high and holy dies away.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
